ACTUS PRIMUS

HIERONIMO: Long may he live to serve my Sovereign Liege,
And soon decay, unless he serve my Liege.

HIERONIMO: That was my son, my gracious sovereign,
Of whom, though from his tender infancy
My loving thoughts did never hope but well,
He never pleased his father's eyes til now,
Nor filled my heart with over-cloying joys. ... 

HIERONIMO: But that I know your Grace for just and wise,
And might seem partial in this difference,
Enforced by nature and by law of arms
My tongue should plead for young Horatio's right.
He hunted well that was a lion's death, ... 
Not he that in a garment wore his skin;
So Hares may pull dead lions by the beard.

HIERONIMO: The first armed knight, that hung his Scutcheon up,
Was English Robert, Earl of Gloucester,
Who, when King Stephen bore sway in Albion,
Arrived with five and twenty thousand men
In Portingale, and by success of war
Enforced the King, then but a Saracen, ... 
To bear the yoke of the English monarchy.

HIERONIMO: The second knight that hung his Scutcheon up,
Was Edmund, Earl of Kent in Albion,
When English Richard wore the diadem.
He came likewise and razed Lisbon walls
And took the King of Portingale in fight; ... 
For which and other such-like service done,
He after was created Duke of York.

HIERONIMO: The third and last, not least in our account
Was, as the rest, a valiant Englishman,
Brave John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster,
As by his Scutcheon plainly may appear. ... 
He with a puissant army came to Spain,
And took our King of Castile prisoner.

ACT II

HIERONIMO: What outcries pluck me from my naked bed
And chill my throbbing heart with trembling fear,
Which never danger yet could daunt before?
Who calls Hieronimo? speak, here I am,
I did not slumber; therefore twas no dream.
No, no, it was some woman cried for help,
And here within this garden did she cry,
And in this garden must I rescue her.
But stay, what murd'rous spectacle is this?
A man hanged up and all the murderers gone: ... 
And in my bower, to lay the guilt on me.
This place was made for pleasure, not for death. 
Those garments that he wears I oft have seen:
Alas, it is Horatio, my sweet son.
Oh no, but he that whilom was my son.
Oh, was it thou that call'dst me from my bed?
Oh speak, if any spark of life remain.
I am thy Father; who hath slain my son?
What savage monster, not of human kind,
Hath here been glutted with thy harmless blood, ... 
And left thy bloody corpse dishonored here,
For me, amidst these dark and deathful shades,
To drown thee with an ocean of my tears?
Oh heavens, why made you night to cover sin?
By day this deed of darkness had not been.
Oh earth, why didst thou not in time devour
The vild profaner of this sacred bower?
Oh poor Horatio, what hadst thou misdone
To leese thy life, ere life was new begun?
Oh wicked butcher, whatsoe'er thou wert, ... 
How could thou strangle virtue and desert?
Aye me most wretched, that have lost my joy
In leesing my Horatio, my sweet boy! 

HIERONIMO: Here, Isabella, help me to lament,
For sighs are stopped and all my tears are spent.

HIERONIMO: To know the author were some ease of grief, ... 
For in revenge my heart would find relief.

HIERONIMO: He supped with us tonight, frolic and merry.
And said he would go visit Balthazar
At the Duke's Palace: there the Prince doth lodge.
He had no custom to stay out so late:
He may be in his chamber; some go see.
Roderigo, ho. 

HIERONIMO: True, all Spain takes note of it. ... 
Besides he is so generally beloved;
His Majesty the other day did grace him
With waiting on his cup: these be favors,
Which do assure me he cannot be short-lived.

HIERONIMO: I wonder how this fellow got his clothes:
Sirrah, sirrah, I'll know the truth of all:
Jaques, run to the Duke of Castile's presently
And bid my son Horatio to come home.
I and his mother have had strange dreams tonight.
Do you hear me, sir?

HIERONIMO:  Well, sir, be gone. ... 
Pedro, come hither; knowest thou who this is?

HIERONIMO:  Too well, who? who is it? Peace, Isabella:
Nay, blush not, man.

HIERONIMO: Ha, ha, St. James, but this doth make me laugh,
That there are more deluded than myself.

HIERONIMO:  Aye:
I would have sworn myself, within this hour,
That this had been my son Horatio:
His garments are so like.
Ha! Are they not great persuasions? ... 

HIERONIMO: Were not, Isabella? dost thou dream it is?
Can thy soft bosom entertain a thought,
That such a black deed of mischief should be done
On one so pure and spotless as our son?
Away, I am ashamed.

HIERONIMO: It was a man, sure, that was hanged up here:
A youth, as I remember: I cut him down. ... 
If it should prove my son now after all.
Say you? say you? Light, lend me a Taper;
Let me look again. Oh God,
Confusion, mischief, torment, death and hell,
Drop all your stings at once in my cold bosom,
That now is stiff with horror; kill me quickly:
Be gracious to me, thou infective night,
And drop this deed of murder down on me;
Gird in my waste of grief with thy large darkness,
And let me not survive, to see the light ... 
May put me in the mind I had a son.

HIERONIMO: How strangely had I lost my way to grief.

HIERONIMO: See'st thou this handkercher besmeared with blood?
It shall not from me, til I take revenge.
See'st thou those wounds that yet are bleeding fresh?
I'll not entomb them, til I have revenged.
Then will I joy amidst my discontent;
Til then my sorrow never shall be spent.

HIERONIMO: Meanwhile, good Isabella, cease thy plaints, ... 
Or at the least, dissemble them awhile:
So shall we sooner find the practice out,
And learn by whom all this was brought about.
Come Isabel, now let us take him up 
And bear him in from out this cursed place.
I'll say his dirge: singing fits not this case.
O aliquis mihi quas pulchrum ver educat herbas

Misceat, & nostro detur medicina dolori;
Aut si qui faciunt annorum oblivia, succos
Prebeat; ipse metam magnum quaecungue per orbem ... 
Gramina Sol pulchras effert in luminis oras;
Ipse bibam quicquid meditatur saga veneni,
Quicquid & herbarum vi caeca nenia nectit:
Omnia perpetiar, lethum quoque, dum semel omnis
Noster in extincto moriatur pectore sensus.
Ergo tuos oculos nunquam (mea vita) videbo,
Et tua perpetuus sepelivit lumina somnus?
Emoriar tecum: sic, sic juvat ire sub umbras.
At tamen absistam properato cedere letho,
Ne mortem vindicta tuam tam nulla sequatur. ... 

ACT III

HIERONIMO: Oh eyes, no eyes, but fountains fraught with tears;
Oh life, no life, but lively form of death;
Oh world, no world, but mass of public wrongs,
Confused and filled with murder and misdeeds.
Oh sacred heavens, if this unhallowed deed,
If this inhuman and barbarous attempt,
If this incomparable murder thus
Of mine, but now no more my son,
Shall unrevealed and unrevenged pass,
How should we term your dealings to be just, ... 
If you unjustly deal with those, that in your justice trust?
The night, sad secretary to my moans,
With direful visions wakes my vexed soul,
And with the wounds of my distressful son
Solicits me for notice of his death.
The ugly fiends do sally forth of hell,
And frame my steps to unfrequented paths,
And fear my heart with fierce inflamed thoughts.
The cloudy day my discontents records,
Early begins to register my dreams, ... 
And drive me forth to seek the murtherer.
Eyes, life, world, heavens, hell, night and day,
See, search, show, send some man, some mean, that may --
What's here? a letter? tush, it is not so:
A letter written to Hieronimo. 
For want of ink, receive this bloody writ:
Me hath my hapless brother hid from thee;
Revenge thyself on Balthazar and him:
For these were they that murdered thy son.
Hieronimo, revenge Horatio's death, ... 
And better fare than Bel-imperia doth.
What means this unexpected miracle?
My son slain by Lorenzo and the Prince.
What cause had they Horatio to malign?
Or what might move thee, Bel-imperia,
To accuse thy brother, had he been the mean?
Hieronimo, beware, thou art betrayed,
And to entrap thy life, this train is laid.
Advise thee therefore, be not credulous:
This is devised to endanger thee, ... 
That thou by this Lorenzo shouldst accuse;
And he, for thy dishonor done, should draw
Thy life in question and thy name in hate.
Dear was the life of my beloved son,
And of his death behoves me be revenged:
Then hazard not thine own, Hieronimo,
But live t'effect thy resolution.
I therefore will by circumstances try,
What I can gather, to confirm this writ;
And hearkening near the Duke of Castile's house, ... 
Close, if I can, with Bel-imperia,
To listen more but nothing to bewray. 
Now, Pedringano.

HIERONIMO: Where's thy Lady?

HIERONIMO:  My Lord --

HIERONIMO: Nay, nay, my Lord, I thank you, it shall not need;
I had a suit unto her, but too late,
And her disgrace makes me unfortunate.

HIERONIMO: Oh no, my Lord; I dare not; it must not be:
I humbly thank your Lordship.

HIERONIMO: Who? you, my Lord?
I reserve your favor for a greater honor;
This is a very toy, my Lord, a toy.

HIERONIMO: Y' faith, my Lord, tis an idle thing I must confess,
I ha' been too slack, too tardy, too remiss unto your honor.

HIERONIMO: In troth, my Lord, it is a thing of nothing:
The murder of a Son, or so --
A thing of nothing, my Lord.

HIERONIMO: My grief no heart, my thoughts no tongue can tell. 

HIERONIMO: Thus must we toil in other men's extremes,
That know not how to remedy our own;
And do them justice, when unjustly we,
For all our wrongs, can compass no redress.
But shall I never live to see the day,
That I may come (by justice of the heavens)
To know the cause that may my cares allay?
This toils my body, this consumeth age,
That only I to all men just must be,
And neither gods nor men be just to me. ... 

HIERONIMO: So is't my duty to regard his death,
Who, when he lived, deserved my dearest blood.
But come for that we came for: let's begin;
For here lies that which bids me to be gone.

HIERONIMO: Stand forth, thou monster, murderer of men;
And here, for satisfaction of the world,
Confess thy folly and repent thy fault;
For there's thy place of execution.

HIERONIMO: Peace, impudent, for thou shalt find it so;
For blood with blood shall, while I sit as judge,
Be satisfied, and the law discharged.
And though myself cannot receive the like,
Yet will I see that others have their right.
Dispatch: the fault's approved and confessed,
And by our law he is condemned to die. ... 

HIERONIMO: I have not seen a wretch so impudent.
Oh monstrous times, where murder's set so light, ... 
And where the soul, that should be shrined in heaven,
Solely delights in interdicted things,
Still wand'ring in the thorny passages,
That intercepts itself of happiness.
Murder, oh bloody monster! God forbid
A fault so foul should 'scape unpunished.
Dispatch, and see this execution done.
This makes me to remember thee, my son. 

HIERONIMO: Where shall I run to breathe abroad my woes,
My woes, whose weight hath wearied the earth?
Or mine exclaims, that have surcharged the air
With ceaseless plaints for my deceased son?
The blust'ring winds, conspiring with my words,
At my lament have moved the leafless trees,
Disrobed the meadows of their flowered green,
Made mountains marsh with spring-tides of my tears
And broken through the brazen gates of hell.
Yet still tormented is my tortured soul ... 
With broken sighs and restless passions
That winged mount; and, hovering in the air,
Beat at the windows of the brightest heavens,
Soliciting for justice and revenge:
But they are placed in those imperial heights,
Where, countermured with walls of diamond,
I find the place impregnable; and they
Resist my woes and give my words no way.

HIERONIMO: Well, what of him?

HIERONIMO: I warrant thee, give it me.

HIERONIMO: Aye, aye.

HIERONIMO: And yet, though somewhat nearer me concerns,
I will, to ease the grief that I sustain, ... 
Take truce with sorrow while I read on this.
'My Lord, I write as mine extremes required,
That you would labor my delivery;
If you neglect, my life is desperate,
And in my death I shall reveal the troth.
You know, my Lord, I slew him for your sake,
And was confederate with the Prince and you;
Won by rewards and hopeful promises,
I help to murder Don Horatio too.'
Help he to murder mine Horatio? ... 
And actors in th' accursed Tragedy
Wast thou, Lorenzo, Balthazar and thou,
Of whom my son, my son deserved so well?
What have I heard, what have mine eyes beheld?
Oh sacred heavens, may it come to pass
That such a monstrous and detested deed,
So closely smothered, and so long concealed,
Shall thus by this be venged or revealed?
Now see I what I durst not then suspect,
That Bel-imperia's Letter was not feigned. ... 
Nor feigned she, though falsely they have wronged
Both her, myself, Horatio, and themselves.
Now may I make compare 'twixt hers and this,
Of every accident I ne'er could find
Til now, and now I feelingly perceive
They did what heaven unpunished would not leave.
Oh false Lorenzo: are these thy flattering looks?
Is this the honor that thou didst my son?
And Balthazar, bane to my soul and me:
Was this the ransom he reserved thee for? ... 
Woe to the cause of these constrained wars;
Woe to thy baseness and captivity;
Woe to thy birth, thy body, and thy soul,
Thy cursed father, and thy conquered self;
And banned with bitter execrations be
The day and place where he did pity thee.
But wherefore waste I mine unfruitful words,
When naught but blood will satisfy my woes?
I will go plain me to my Lord the King,
And cry aloud for justice through the Court, ... 
Wearing the flints with these my withered feet;
And either purchase justice by entreats,
Or tire them all with my revenging threats. 

HIERONIMO: Tis neither as you think, nor as you think,
Nor as you think; you're wide all:
These slippers are not mine, they were my son Horatio's.
My son -- and what's a son? A thing begot
Within a pair of minutes, thereabout:
A lump bred up in darkness, and doth serve
To ballace these light creatures we call women;
And at nine months' end, creeps forth to light.
What is there yet in a son,
To make a father dote, rave, or run mad? ... 
Being born, it pouts, cries, and breeds teeth.
What is there yet in a son? He must be fed,
Be taught to go, and speak. Aye, or yet?
Why might not a man love a calf as well?
Or melt in passion o'er a frisking kid,
As for a son? Methinks, a young bacon,
Or a fine little smooth horse-colt,
Should move a man as much as doth a son.
For one of these, in very little time,
Will grow to some good use; whereas a son, ... 
The more he grows in stature and in years,
The more unsquared, unbeveled, he appears,
Reckons his parents among the rank of fools,
Strikes care upon their heads with his mad riots,
Makes them look old before they meet with age.
This is a son --
And what a loss were this, considered truly? --
Oh, but my Horatio
Grew out of reach of these insatiate humors:
He loved his loving parents; ... 
He was my comfort, and his mother's joy,
The very arm that did hold up our house:
Our hopes were stored up in him,
None but a damned murderer could hate him.
He had not seen the back of nineteen year,
When his strong arm unhorsed the proud Prince Balthazar,
And his great mind, too full of Honor,
Took him unto mercy:
That valiant, but ignoble Portingale.
Well, heaven is heaven still. ... 
And there is Nemesis, and Furies,
And things called whips,
And they sometimes do meet with murderers:
They do not always 'scape, that is some comfort,
Aye, aye, aye; and then time steals on,
And steals, and steals,
Til violence leaps forth like thunder
Wrapped in a ball of fire,
And so doth bring confusion to them all.

HIERONIMO: The next way from me.

HIERONIMO: Oh, hard by: tis yon house that you see.

HIERONIMO: Who, my Lord Lorenzo?

HIERONIMO:  Oh, forbear,
For other talk for us far fitter were.
But if you be importunate to know ... 
The way to him and where to find him out,
Then list to me, and I'll resolve your doubt.
There is a path upon your left-hand side
That leadeth from a guilty conscience
Unto a forest of distrust and fear,
A darksome place, and dangerous to pass:
There shall you meet with melancholy thoughts,
Whose baleful humors if you but uphold,
It will conduct you to despair and death:
Whose rocky cliffs when you have once beheld, ... 
Within a hugy dale of lasting night,
That, kindled with the world's iniquities,
Doth cast up filthy and detested fumes: --
Not far from thence, where murderers have built
A habitation for their cursed souls,
There, in a brazen cauldron, fixed by Jove,
In his fell wrath, upon a sulfur flame,
Yourselves shall find Lorenzo bathing him
In boiling lead and blood of innocents.

HIERONIMO:  Ha, ha, ha! ... 
Why, ha, ha, ha! Farewell, good ha, ha, ha. 

HIERONIMO: Now, sir, perhaps I come and see the King;
The King sees me, and fain would hear my suit;
Why, is not this a strange and seld-seen thing,
That standers-by with toys should strike me mute?
Go to, I see their shifts and say no more.
Hieronimo, tis time for thee to trudge:
Down by the dale that flows with purple gore,
Standeth a fiery Tower; there sits a judge
Upon a seat of steel and molten brass,
And 'twixt his teeth he holds a fire-brand ... 
That leads unto the lake where hell doth stand.
Away, Hieronimo! To him be gone:
He'll do thee justice for Horatio's death.
Turn down this path: thou shalt be with him straight;
Or this, and then thou needst not take thy breath:
This way, or that way -- soft and fair, not so:
For if I hang or kill myself, let's know
Who will revenge Horatio's murder then?
No, no; fie, no: pardon me, I'll none of that.
This way I'll take, and this way comes the King, ... 
And here I'll have a fling at him, that's flat.
And Balthazar, I'll be with thee to bring,
And thee, Lorenzo. Here's the King -- nay, stay,
And here, aye here -- there goes the hare away.

HIERONIMO: Justice, oh, justice to Hieronimo.

HIERONIMO: Oh, is he so?

HIERONIMO: Not I. Hieronimo beware; goe by, goe by.

HIERONIMO: Horatio, who calls Horatio? ... 

HIERONIMO: Justice, Oh, justice, justice, gentle King.

HIERONIMO: Justice! Oh justice: Oh my son, my son,
My son, whom naught can ransom or redeem.

HIERONIMO: Away, Lorenzo, hinder me no more.
For thou hast made me bankrupt of my bliss.
Give me my son; you shall not ransom him. ... 
Away, I'll rip the bowels of the earth, 
And ferry over to th' Elysian plains,
And bring my son to show his deadly wounds.
Stand from about me;
I'll make a pickaxe of my poniard,
And here surrender up my marshalship;
For I'll go marshal up the fiends in hell,
To be avenged on you all for this.

HIERONIMO: Nay, soft and fair; you shall not need to strive;
Needs must he go that the devils drive. 

HIERONIMO: I pry through every crevice of each wall,
Look on each tree and search through every brake,
Beat at the bushes, stamp our grandam earth,
Dive in the water and stare up to heaven: ... 
Yet cannot I behold my son Horatio. --
How now, who's there? Spirits, spirits?

HIERONIMO: What make you with your torches in the dark?

HIERONIMO: No, no, you are deceived -- not I -- you are deceived.
Was I so mad to bid you light your torches now?
Light me your torches at the mid of noon,
Whenas the sun-god rides in all his glory:
Light me your torches then.

HIERONIMO: Let it be burnt; night is a murderous slut
That would not have her treasons to be seen;
And yonder pale-faced Hecate there, the Moon,
Doth give consent to that is done in darkness;
And all those Stars that gaze upon her face
Are aeglets on her sleeve, pins on her train;
And those that should be powerful and divine
Do sleep in darkness, when they most should shine.

HIERONIMO: Villain, thou liest, and thou dost nought
But tell me I am mad: Thou liest, I am not mad!
I know thee to be Pedro, and he Jaques.
I'll prove it to thee; and were I mad, how could I?
Where was she that same night when my Horatio
Was murdered? She should have shone: Search thou the book.
Had the moon shone in my boy's face there was a kind of grace,
That I know -- nay, I do know -- had the murderer seen him,
His weapon would have fall'n and cut the earth, ... 
Had he been framed of naught but blood and death.
Alack, when mischief doth it knows not what,
What shall we say to mischief? 

HIERONIMO: Indeed, Isabella, we do nothing here;
I do not cry: ask Pedro, and ask Jaques;
Not I, indeed; we are very merry, very merry.
ISABELLA: How? Be merry here, be merry here?
Is not this the place, and this the very tree, ... 
Where my Horatio died, where he was murdered?

HIERONIMO: Was -- do not say what: let her weep it out.
This was the tree; I set it of a kernel:
And when our hot Spain could not let it grow,
But that the infant and the human sap
Began to wither, duly twice a morning
Would I be sprinkling it with fountain-water.
At last it grew, and grew, and bore, and bore,
Til at length
It grew a gallows, and did bear our sonne, ... 
It bore thy fruit and mine: oh wicked, wicked plant.
See who knocks there.

HIERONIMO: Bid him come in, and paint some comfort,
For surely there's none lives but painted comfort.
Let him come in. One knows not what may chance:
Gods will that I should set this tree -- but even so
Masters' ungrateful servants rear from nought,
And then they hate them that did bring them up. 

HIERONIMO:  Wherefore, why, thou scornful villain?
How, where, or by what means should I be blest? ... 

HIERONIMO: Oh ambitious beggar, wouldst thou have that
That lives not in the world?
Why, all the undelved mines cannot buy
An ounce of justice; tis a jewel so inestimable.
I tell thee, God hath engrossed all justice in his hands,
And there is none but what comes from him.

HIERONIMO: How, was thy son murdered?

HIERONIMO: What, not as thine? That's a lie
As massy as the earth: I had a son
Whose least unvalued hair did weigh
A thousand of thy son's: and he was murdered.

HIERONIMO: Nor I, nor I: but this same one of mine
Was worth a legion. But all is one.
Pedro, Jaques, go in a-doors; Isabella, go,
And this good fellow here and I
Will range this hideous orchard up and down, ... 
Like to two Lions reaved of their young.
Go in a-doors, I say. 
Come, let's talk wisely now. Was thy son murdered?

HIERONIMO:  So was mine.
How dost take it? Art thou not sometimes mad?
Is there no tricks that comes before thine eyes?

HIERONIMO: Art a Painter? canst paint me a tear, or a wound,
a groan or a sigh? Canst paint me such a tree as this?

HIERONIMO: Bazardo, afore-god, an excellent fellow. Look you,
sir, do you see, I'd have you paint me  my Gallery, in your oil
colors matted, and draw me five years younger than I am --
do ye see, sir, let five years go, let them go like the Marshal of
Spain -- my wife Isabella standing by me, with a speaking look to
my son Horatio, which should intend to this or some such-like
purpose: 'God bless thee, my sweet son,' and my hand leaning
upon his head, thus, sir. Do you see? may it be done?

HIERONIMO: Nay, I pray, mark me, sir: then, sir, would I have you
paint me this tree, this very tree. Canst paint a doleful cry?

HIERONIMO: Nay, it should cry; but all is one. Well, sir, paint me
a youth run through and through with villain's swords, hanging
upon this tree. Canst thou draw a murderer?

HIERONIMO: Oh, let them be worse, worse: stretch thine
Art, and let their beards be of Judas his own color; and let ... 
their eyebrows jutty over: in any case observe that. Then,
sir, after some violent noise, bring me forth in my shirt,
and my gown under mine arm, with my torch in my hand
and my sword reared up thus: and with these words:
'What noise is this? Who calls Hieronimo?'
May it be done?

HIERONIMO: Well, sir; then bring me forth, bring me through alley
and alley, still with a distracted countenance going along, and let
my hair heave up my night-cap. Let the Clouds scowl, make
the Moon dark, the Stars extinct, the Winds blowing, the Bells
tolling, the Owl shrieking, the Toads croaking, the minutes ... 
jarring, and the clock striking twelve. And than at last, sir,
starting, behold a man hanging, and tottering, and tottering, as
you know the wind will wave a man, and I with a trice to cut
him down. And looking upon him by the advantage of my torch,
find it to be my son Horatio. There you may  a passion,
there you may show a passion. Draw me like old Priam of Troy,
crying: 'the house is a-fire, the house is a-fire, as the torch over
my head!' Make me curse, make me rave, make me cry, make
me mad, make me well again, make me curse hell, invocate
heaven, and in the end leave me in a trance -- and so forth.

HIERONIMO: Oh no, there is no end: the end is death and madness.
As I am never better than when I am mad; then methinks I am
a brave fellow; then I do wonders: but reason abuseth me,
and there's the torment, there's the hell. At the last, sir, bring
me to one of the murderers; were he as strong as Hector,
thus would I tear and drag him up and drown.

HIERONIMO: Vindicta mihi!
Aye, heaven will be revenged of every ill;
Nor will they suffer murder unrepaid.
Then stay, Hieronimo, attend their will:
For mortal men may not appoint their time.
Per scelus semper tutum est sceleribus iter.
Strike, and strike home, where wrong is offered thee;
For evils unto ills conductors be,
And death's the worst of resolution.
For he that thinks with patience to contend ... 
To quiet life, his life shall easily end. --
Fata si miseros juvant, habes salutem;
Fata si vitam negant, habes sepulchrum:
If destiny thy miseries do ease,
Then hast thou health, and happy shalt thou be:
If destiny deny thee life, Hieronimo,
Yet shalt thou be assured of a tomb:
If neither, yet let this thy comfort be,
Heaven covereth him that hath no burial.
And to conclude, I will revenge his death, ... 
But how? not as the vulgar wits of men,
With open, but inevitable ills,
As by a secret, yet a certain mean,
Which under kind-ship will be cloaked best.
Wise men will take their opportunity,
Closely and safely fitting things to time.
But in extremes advantage hath no time.
And therefore all times fit not for revenge
Thus therefore will I rest me in unrest,
Dissembling quiet in unquietness, ... 
Not seeming that I know their villainies,
That my simplicity may make them think
That ignorantly I will let all slip:
For ignorance, I wot, and well they know,
Remedium malorum iners est.
Nor ought avails it me to menace them
Who, as a wintry storm upon a plain,
Will bear me down with their nobility.
No, no, Hieronimo, thou must enjoin
Thine eyes to observation, and thy tongue ... 
To milder speeches than thy spirit affords;
Thy heart to patience and thy hands to rest,
Thy Cap to courtesy, and thy knee to bow,
Til to revenge thou know when, where, and how. 
How now, what noise? What coil is that you keep? 

HIERONIMO: That I should plead their several actions?
Why, let them enter, and let me see them. ... 

HIERONIMO: Come near, you men, that thus importune me. --
 Now must I bear a face of gravity,
For thus I used, before my Marshalship,
To plead in causes as Corregidor. --
Come on, sirs, what's the matter?

HIERONIMO: Of Battery?

HIERONIMO:  Give place. ... 

HIERONIMO: Content you, sirs; are you determined
That I should plead your several actions?

HIERONIMO: But wherefore stands yon silly man so mute,
With mournful eyes and hands to heaven upreared?
Come hither, father, let me know thy cause.

HIERONIMO: Say, father, tell me what's thy suit?

HIERONIMO: What's here? 'The humble supplication
Of Don Bazulto for his murdered son.'

HIERONIMO:  No, sir, it was my murdered son, ... 
Oh my son, my son, Oh my son Horatio.
But mine, or thine, Bazulto, be content.
Here, take my handercher, and wipe thine eyes,
Whiles wretched I in thy mishaps may see
The lively portrait of my dying self.
Oh no, not this; Horatio, this was thine;
And when I dyed it in thy dearest blood,
This was a token twixt thy soul and me,
That of thy death revenged I should be.
But here, take this, and this -- what, my purse? -- ... 
Aye this, and that, and all of them are thine;
For all as one are our extremities.

HIERONIMO: See, see, oh see thy shame, Hieronimo;
See here a loving father to his son:
Behold the sorrows and the sad laments
That he delivereth for his son's decease.
If love's effects so strives in lesser things,
If love enforce such moods in meaner wits, ... 
If love express such power in poor estates;
Hieronimo, when, as a raging Sea,
Tossed with the wind and tide, o'erturnest then
The upper billows' course of waves to keep,
Whilest lesser waters labor in the deep:
Then shamest thou not, Hieronimo, to neglect
The sweet revenge of thy Horatio?
Though on this earth justice will not be found,
I'll down to hell, and in this passion
Knock at the dismal gates of Pluto's court, ... 
Getting by force, as once Alcides did,
A troop of furies and tormenting hags,
To torture Don Lorenzo and the rest.
Yet lest the triple-headed porter should
Deny my passage to the slimy strand,
The Thracian poet thou shalt counterfeit.
Come on, old father, be my Orpheus,
And if thou canst no notes upon the Harp,
Then sound the burden of thy sore heart's grief,
Til we do gain that Proserpine may grant
Revenge on them that murdered my son. ... 
Then will I rent and tear them, thus, and thus,
Shivering their limbs in pieces with my teeth. 

HIERONIMO: That cannot be, I gave it never a wound;
Show me one drop of blood fall from the same:
How is it possible I should slay it then? ... 
Tush, no; run after, catch me if you can.

enters again, who, staring him the face, speaks.

HIERONIMO: And art thou come, Horatio, from the depth,
To ask for justice in this upper earth,
To tell thy father thou art unrevenged,
To wring more tears from Isabella's eyes,
Whose lights are dimmed with over-long laments?
Go back, my son, complain to Aecus;
For here's no justice; gentle boy, be gone,
For justice is exiled from the earth:
Hieronimo will bear thee company. ... 
Thy mother cries on righteous Rhadamanth
For just revenge against the murderers.

HIERONIMO: But let me look on my Horatio.
Sweet boy, how art thou changed in death's black shade.
Had Proserpine no pity on thy youth,
But suffered thy fair crimson-colored spring
With withered winter to be blasted thus?
Horatio, thou art older than thy father:
Ah, ruthless fate, that favor thus transforms. ... 

HIERONIMO: What, not my son? thou then a fury art,
Sent from the empty Kingdom of black night,
To summon me to make appearance
Before grim Minos and just Rhadamanth,
To plague Hieronimo, that is remiss,
And seeks not vengeance for Horatio's death.

HIERONIMO: Aye, now I know thee, now thou namest thy son; ... 
Thou art the lively image of my grief;
Within thy face, my sorrows I may see.
Thy eyes are gummed with tears, thy cheeks are wan,
Thy forehead troubled, and thy mutt'ring lips
Murmur sad words abruptly broken off
By force of windy sighs thy spirit breathes;
And all this sorrow riseth for thy son;
And self-same sorrow feel I for my son.
Come in, old man, thou shalt to Isabel;
Lean on my arm; I thee, thou me, shalt stay, ... 
And thou, and I and she will sing a song,
Three parts in one, but all of discords framed: --
Talk not of cords, but let us now be gone,
For with a cord Horatio was slain. 

HIERONIMO: And where's the Duke?

HIERONIMO:  Even so. --
What new device have they devised, trow?
Pocas Palabras, mild as the Lamb:
Is't I will be revenged? no, I am not the man.

HIERONIMO: My Lords, I thank you for Horatio.

HIERONIMO:  What, so short?
Then I'll be gone, I thank you for't.

HIERONIMO: With me, sir? why my Lord, I thought you had done.

HIERONIMO: Why, is not this a miserable thing, my Lord?

HIERONIMO: Your son Lorenzo? whom, my noble Lord?
The hope of Spain, mine honorable friend? ... 
Grant me the combat of them if they dare:
I'll meet him face-to-face, to tell me so.
These be the scandalous reports of such
As love not me, and hate my Lord too much.
Should I suspect Lorenzo would prevent
Or cross my suit, that loved my son so well?
My Lord, I am ashamed it should be said.

HIERONIMO: My good Lord, I know you did not.

HIERONIMO: Aye, marry, my Lord, and shall.
Friends, quoth he? see, I'll be friends with you all:
Specially with you, my lovely Lord;
For divers causes it is fit for us
That we be friends: the world is suspicious, ... 
And men may think what we imagine not.

HIERONIMO: What else? it were a shame it should not be so.

HIERONIMO: Your Lordship's to command. Pah: keep your way:
Chi mi fa piu carezze che non suole,
Tradito mi ha, o tradir mi voule. 

ACT IV

HIERONIMO: But may it be that Bel-imperia ... 
Vows such revenge as she hath deigned to say?
Why then I see that heaven applies our drift,
And all the Saints do sit soliciting
For vengeance on those cursed murderers.
Madam, tis true, and now I find it so,
I found a letter, written in your name,
And in that Letter, how Horatio died.
Pardon, O pardon, Bel-imperia,
My fear and care in not believing it;
Nor think I thoughtless think upon a mean ... 
To let his death be unrevenged at full:
And here I vow -- so you but give consent,
And will conceal my resolution --
I will erelong determine of their deaths
That causeless thus have murdered my son.

HIERONIMO: On then; whatsoever I devise,
Let me entreat you, grace my practices: ... 
For why the plot's already in mine head.
Here they are. 

HIERONIMO: Aye, my Lord; such courting as, I promise you,
She hath my heart, but you, my Lord, have hers.

HIERONIMO:  My help?
Why, my good Lords, assure yourselves of me;
For you have given me cause; aye, by my faith, have you.

HIERONIMO: Is this all?

HIERONIMO: Why then, I'll fit you; say no more.
When I was young, I gave my mind ... 
And plied myself to fruitless Poetry;
Which though it profit the professor naught,
Yet is it passing pleasing to the world.

HIERONIMO:  Marry, my good Lord, thus:
(And yet, methinks, you are too quick with us): --
When in Toledo there I studied,
It was my chance to write a Tragedy,
See here, my Lords -- 
Which, long forgot, I found this other day.
Now would your Lordships favor me so much ... 
As but to grace me with your acting it --
I mean each one of you to play a part --
Assure you it will prove most passing strange,
And wondrous plausible to that assembly.

HIERONIMO: Why, Nero thought it no disparagement,
And Kings and Emperors have ta'en delight
To make experience of their wits in plays.

HIERONIMO: Now, my good Lord, could you entreat
Your sister Bel-imperia to make one?
For what's a play without a woman in it?

HIERONIMO: Why this is well: I tell you, Lordings,
It was determined to have been acted ... 
By Gentlemen and scholars too,
Such as could tell what to speak.

HIERONIMO: That shall I roundly. The Chronicles of Spain
Record this written of a Knight of Rhodes:
He was betrothed, and wedded at the length,
To one Perseda, an Italian Dame, ... 
Whose beauty ravished all that her beheld,
Especially the soul of Soliman,
Who at the marriage was the chiefest guest.
By sundry means sought Soliman to win
Perseda's love, and could not gain the same.
Then 'gan he break his passions to a friend,
One of his Bashaws whom he held full dear;
Her had this Bashaw long solicited,
And saw she was not otherwise to be won,
But by her husband's death, this Knight of Rhodes, ... 
Whom presently by treachery he slew.
She, stirred with an exceeding hate therefore,
As cause of this, slew Soliman,
And, to escape the Bashaw's tyranny,
Did stab herself, and this the Tragedy.

HIERONIMO: Marry, thus:
Moved with remorse of his misdeeds,
Ran to a mountain-top, and hung himself. ... 

HIERONIMO: Oh, that will I, my Lords, make no doubt of it:
I'll play the murderer, I warrant you;
For I have already conceited that.

HIERONIMO: Great Soliman, the Turkish Emperor.

HIERONIMO:  Erastus, the Knight of Rhodes.

HIERONIMO: Perseda, chaste and resolute. --
And here, my Lords, are several abstracts drawn, ... 
For each of you to note your parts,
And act it, as occasion's offered you.
You must provide a Turkish cap,
A black mustachio, and a Falchion; 
You, with a Cross, like to a Knight of Rhodes;
And Madam, you must attire yourself,
Like Phoebe, Flora, or the huntress,
Which to your discretion shall seem best.
And as for me, my Lords, I'll look to one,
And with the ransom that the Viceroy sent, ... 
So furnish and perform this Tragedy,
As all the world shall say, Hieronimo
Was liberal in gracing of it so.

HIERONIMO: A Comedy?
Fie, Comedies are fit for common wits:
But to present a Kingly troop withal,
Give me a stately-written Tragedy;
Tragedia cothurnata, fitting Kings,
Containing matter, and not common things. ... 
My Lords, all this must be perfourmed,
As fitting for the first night's reveling.
The Italian Tragedians were so sharp of wit
That in one hour's meditation
They would perform anything in action.

HIERONIMO: In Paris? Mass, and well remembered.
There's one thing more that rests for us to do.

HIERONIMO: Each one of us must act his part
In unknown languages,
That it may breed the more variety:
As you, my Lord, in Latin, I in Greek,
You in Italian, and for because I know
That Bel-imperia hath practiced the French,
In courtly French shall all her phrases be.

HIERONIMO: It must be so; for the conclusion
Shall prove the intention, and all was good:
And I myself in an Oration,
And with a strange and wondrous show besides,
That I will have there behind a curtain,
Assure yourself, shall make the matter known:
And all shall be concluded in one Scene,
For there's no pleasure ta'en in tediousness.

HIERONIMO: You'll ply this gear?

HIERONIMO:  Why so:
Now shall I see the fall of Babylon,
Wrought by the heavens in this confusion.
And if the world like not this tragedy,
Hard is the hap of old Hieronimo. 

HIERONIMO: Oh sir, it is for the author's credit,
To look that all things may go well.
But, good my Lord, let me entreat your grace
To give the King the copy of the play:
This is the argument of what we show.

HIERONIMO: One thing more, my good Lord.

HIERONIMO:  Let me entreat your grace ... 
That, when the train are passed into the gallery,
You would vouchsafe to throw me down the key.

HIERONIMO: What, are you ready, Balthazar?
Bring a chair and a cushion for the King. 
Well done, Balthazar, Hang up the Title:
Our scene is Rhodes: -- what, is your beard on?

HIERONIMO: Dispatch, for shame; are you so long? ... 
Bethink thyself, Hieronimo,
Recall thy wits, recompt thy former wrongs
Thou hast received by murder of thy son.
And lastly, not the least, how Isabel,
Once his mother and thy dearest wife,
All woe-begone for him, hath slain herself.
Behooves thee then, Hieronimo, to be revenged.
The plot is laid of dire revenge:
On, then, Hieronimo, pursue revenge,
For nothing wants but acting of revenge. 

HIERONIMO: 'Whatever joy earth yields, betide your Majesty.'

HIERONIMO: 'Let then Perseda on your grace attend.'

HIERONIMO: 'Remove Erasto, mighty Soliman,
And then Perseda will be quickly won.'

HIERONIMO: 'Let not Erasto live to grieve great Soliman.'

HIERONIMO: 'But if he be your rival, let him die.'

HIERONIMO: 'Erasto, Soliman saluteth thee, ... 
And lets thee wit by me his highness' will,
Which is, thou shouldest be thus employed.' 

HIERONIMO: But Bel-imperia plays Perseda well.

HIERONIMO: Marry, this follows for Hieronimo:
Here break we off our sundry languages,
And thus conclude I in our vulgar tongue.
Happily you think -- but bootless are your thoughts --
That this is fabulously counterfeit,
And that we do as all Tragedians do:
To die today for fashioning our Scene --
The death of Ajax or some Roman peer -- ... 
And in a minute starting up again,
Revive to please tomorrow's audience.
No, Princes; know I am Hieronimo,
The hopeless father of a hapless Son,
Whose tongue is tuned to tell his latest tale,
Not to excuse gross errors in the play.
I see your looks urge instance of these words;
Behold the reason urging me to this: 
See here my show, look on this spectacle:
Here lay my hope, and here my hope hath end: ... 
Here lay my heart, and here my heart was slain:
Here lay my treasure, here my treasure lost:
Here lay my bliss, and here my bliss bereft:
But hope, heart, treasure, joy and bliss,
All fled, failed, died, yea, all decayed with this.
From forth these wounds came breath that gave me life;
They murdered me that made these fatal marks.
The cause was love, whence grew this mortal hate;
The hate: Lorenzo and young Balthazar:
The love: my son to Bel-imperia. ... 
But night, the coverer of accursed crimes,
With pitchy silence hushed these traitors' harms,
And lent them leave, for they had sorted leisure
To take advantage in my Garden-plot
Upon my Son, my dear Horatio:
There merciless they butchered up my boy,
In black dark night, to pale dim, cruel death.
He shrieks: I heard, and yet, methinks, I hear
His dismal out-cry echo in the air.
With soonest speed I hasted to the noise, ... 
Where hanging on a tree I found my son,
Through-girt with wounds, and slaughtered as you see.
And grieved I (think you) at this spectacle?
Speak, Portuguese, whose loss resembles mine:
If thou canst weep upon thy Balthazar,
Tis like I wailed for my Horatio.
And you, my L, whose reconciled son
Marched in a net, and thought himself unseen,
And rated me for brain-sick lunacy,
With 'God amend that mad Hieronimo,' ... 
How can you brook our play's Catastrophe?
And here behold this bloody handkercher,
Which at Horatio's death I weeping dipped
Within the river of his bleeding wounds.
It is propitious, see, I have reserved,
And never hath it left my bloody heart,
Soliciting remembrance of my vow
With these, Oh, these accursed murderers:
Which, now performed, my heart is satisfied.
And to this end the Bashaw I became,
That might revenge me on Lorenzo's life, ... 
Who therefore was appointed to the part,
And was to represent the Knight of Rhodes,
That I might kill him more conveniently.
So, Viceroy, was thus Balthazar, thy Son,
That Soliman which Bel-imperia,
In person of Perseda, murdered:
Solely appointed to that tragic part
That she might slay him that offended her.
Poor Bel-imperia missed her part in this, ... 
For though the story saith she should have died,
Yet I of kindness, and of care to her,
Did otherwise determine of her end;
But love of him, whom they did hate too much
Did urge her resolution to be such.
And, Princes, now behold Hieronimo,
Author and actor in this Tragedy,
Bearing his latest fortune in his fist;
And will as resolute conclude his part
As any of the Actors gone before. ... 
And, Gentles, thus I end my play;
Urge no more words, I have no more to say.

HIERONIMO: Viceroy, I will not trust thee with my life,
Which I this day have offered to my son. ... 
Accused wretch,
Why stayest thou him that was resolved to die?

HIERONIMO: Oh, good words: as dear to me was my Horatio,
As yours, or yours, or yours, my L, to you,
My guiltless Son was by Lorenzo slain, ... 
And by Lorenzo and that Balthazar
Am I at last revenged thoroughly,
Upon whose souls may heavens be yet avenged
With greater far than these afflictions.

HIERONIMO: What lesser liberty can kings afford
Than harmless silence? then afford it me. ... 
Sufficeth, I may not, nor I will not tell thee.

HIERONIMO: Indeed thou mayest torment me, as his wretched Son
Hath done in murd'ring my Horatio:
But never shall thou force me to reveal
The thing which I have vowed inviolate.
And therefore, in despite of all thy threats,
Pleased with their deaths, and eased with their revenge,
First take my tongue, and afterwards my heart. ... 

HIERONIMO: But are you sure they are dead?

HIERONIMO: What, and yours too?

HIERONIMO: Nay, then I care not; come, and we shall be friends;
Let us lay our heads together:
See, here's a goodly noose will hold them all.

HIERONIMO: Secure? why doest thou wonder at it? ... 
I tell thee, Viceroy, this day I have seen revenge,
And in that sight am grown a prouder monarch
Than ever sat under the Crown of Spain.
Had I as many lives as there be Stars,
As many heavens to go to, as those lives,
I'd give them all, aye, and my soul to boot,
But I would see thee ride in this red pool.

HIERONIMO: Oh, good words: as dear to me was my Horatio,
As yours, or yours, or yours, my L, to you,
My guiltless Son was by Lorenzo slain, ... 
And by Lorenzo and that Balthazar
Am I at last revenged thoroughly,
Upon whose souls may heavens be yet avenged
With greater far than these afflictions.

HIERONIMO: Methinks, since I grew inward with Revenge, ... 
I cannot look with scorn enough on Death.

HIERONIMO: Do, do, do; and meantime I'll torture you.
You had a Son (as I take it), and your Son
Should ha'e been married to your daughter: ha, wast not so?
You had a Son too, he was my Liege's Nephew;
He was proud and politic. Had he lived,
He might a come to wear the crown of Spain --
I thinke 'twas so: 'twas I that killed him; ... 
Look you, this same hand 'twas it that stabbed
His heart -- do ye see? this hand --
For one Horatio, if you ever knew him:
A youth, one that they hanged up in his father's garden,
One that did force your valiant Son to yield,
While your more valiant Son did take him prisoner.

HIERONIMO: Now do I applaud what I have acted. ... 
Nunc iners cadat manus.
Now to express the rupture of my part,
First take my tongue and afterwards my heart.

