TITUS
Hail Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds!
Lo, as the bark that hath discharged his fraught
Returns with precious lading to the bay
From whence at first she weighed her anchorage,
Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,
To resalute his country with his tears,
Tears of true joy for his return to Rome.
Thou great defender of this Capitol,
Stand gracious to the rites that we intend.
Romans, of five-and-twenty valiant sons,
Half of the number that King Priam had,
Behold the poor remains alive and dead.
These that survive let Rome reward with love;
These that I bring unto their latest home,
With burial amongst their ancestors.
Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.
Titus, unkind and careless of thine own,
Why suffer'st thou thy sons unburied yet
To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
Make way to lay them by their brethren.
There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars.
O sacred receptacle of my joys,
Sweet cell of virtue and nobility,
How many sons hast thou of mine in store
That thou wilt never render to me more?

TITUS
I give him you, the noblest that survives,
The eldest son of this distressed queen.

TITUS
Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me.
These are their brethren whom your Goths beheld
Alive and dead, and for their brethren slain
Religiously they ask a sacrifice.
To this your son is marked, and die he must,
T' appease their groaning shadows that are gone.

TITUS
Let it be so. And let Andronicus
Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
In peace and honor rest you here, my sons,
Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest,
Secure from worldly chances and mishaps.
Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,
Here grow no damned drugs; here are no storms,
No noise, but silence and eternal sleep.
In peace and honor rest you here, my sons.

TITUS
Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserved
The cordial of mine age to glad my heart!--
Lavinia, live, outlive thy father's days
And fame's eternal date, for virtue's praise.

TITUS
Thanks, gentle tribune, noble brother Marcus.

TITUS
A better head her glorious body fits
Than his that shakes for age and feebleness.
 What, should I don
this robe and trouble you?
Be chosen with proclamations today,
Tomorrow yield up rule, resign my life,
And set abroad new business for you all?
Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,
And led my country's strength successfully,
And buried one and twenty valiant sons,
Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms,
In right and service of their noble country.
Give me a staff of honor for mine age,
But not a scepter to control the world.
Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.

TITUS
Content thee, prince. I will restore to thee
The people's hearts and wean them from themselves.

TITUS
People of Rome, and people's tribunes here,
I ask your voices and your suffrages.
Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus?

TITUS
Tribunes, I thank you, and this suit I make:
That you create our emperor's eldest son,
Lord Saturnine, whose virtues will, I hope,
Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on Earth
And ripen justice in this commonweal.
Then, if you will elect by my advice,
Crown him and say "Long live our emperor."

TITUS
It doth, my worthy lord, and in this match
I hold me highly honored of your Grace;
And here in sight of Rome to Saturnine,
King and commander of our commonweal,
The wide world's emperor, do I consecrate
My sword, my chariot, and my prisoners,
Presents well worthy Rome's imperious lord.
Receive them, then, the tribute that I owe,
Mine honor's ensigns humbled at thy feet.

TITUS
How, sir? Are you in earnest then, my lord?

TITUS
Traitors, avaunt! Where is the Emperor's guard?

TITUS
Nor thou nor he are any sons of mine.
My sons would never so dishonor me.
Traitor, restore Lavinia to the Emperor.

TITUS
O monstrous! What reproachful words are these?

TITUS
These words are razors to my wounded heart.

TITUS
I am not bid to wait upon this bride.
Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone,
Dishonored thus and challenged of wrongs?

TITUS
No, foolish tribune, no; no son of mine,
Nor thou, nor these confederates in the deed
That hath dishonored all our family.
Unworthy brother and unworthy sons!

TITUS
Traitors, away! He rests not in this tomb.
This monument five hundred years hath stood,
Which I have sumptuously reedified.
Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors
Repose in fame, none basely slain in brawls.
Bury him where you can. He comes not here.

TITUS
"And shall"? What villain was it spake that word?

TITUS
What, would you bury him in my despite?

TITUS
Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest,
And with these boys mine honor thou hast wounded.
My foes I do repute you every one.
So trouble me no more, but get you gone.

TITUS
Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.

TITUS
I know not, Marcus, but I know it is.
Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell.
Is she not then beholding to the man
That brought her for this high good turn so far?
Yes, and will nobly him remunerate.

TITUS
Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds.
'Tis thou, and those, that have dishonored me.
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge
How I have loved and honored Saturnine.	

TITUS
Tomorrow, an it please your Majesty
To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
With horn and hound we'll give your Grace bonjour.