TITUS
She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.

TITUS
Fear her not, Lucius. Somewhat doth she mean.
See, Lucius, see, how much she makes of thee.
Somewhither would she have thee go with her.
Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care
Read to her sons than she hath read to thee
Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.

TITUS
How now, Lavinia?--Marcus, what means this?
Some book there is that she desires to see.--
Which is it, girl, of these?--Open them, boy.--
 But thou art deeper read and better
skilled.
Come and take choice of all my library,
And so beguile thy sorrow till the heavens
Reveal the damned contriver of this deed.--
Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?

TITUS
Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?

TITUS
Soft! So busily she turns the leaves.
Help her! What would she find?--Lavinia, shall I read?
This is the tragic tale of Philomel,
And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape.
And rape, I fear, was root of thy annoy.

TITUS
Lavinia, wert thou thus surprised, sweet girl,
Ravished and wronged as Philomela was,
Forced in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods?
See, see! Ay, such a place there is where we did hunt--
O, had we never, never hunted there!--
Patterned by that the poet here describes,
By nature made for murders and for rapes.

TITUS
Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none but friends,
What Roman lord it was durst do the deed.
Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,
That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?

TITUS
"Stuprum. Chiron, Demetrius."

TITUS
'Tis sure enough, an you knew how.
But if you hunt these bearwhelps, then beware;
The dam will wake an if she wind you once.
She's with the lion deeply still in league,
And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back;
And when he sleeps will she do what she list.
You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let alone.
And come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
And with a gad of steel will write these words,
And lay it by. The angry northern wind
Will blow these sands like Sibyl's leaves abroad,
And where's our lesson then?--Boy, what say you?

TITUS
Come, go with me into mine armory.
Lucius, I'll fit thee, and withal my boy
Shall carry from me to the Empress' sons
Presents that I intend to send them both.
Come, come. Thou 'lt do my message, wilt thou not?

TITUS
No, boy, not so. I'll teach thee another course.--
Lavinia, come.--Marcus, look to my house.
Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court;
Ay, marry, will we, sir, and we'll be waited on.

TITUS
Come, Marcus, come. Kinsmen, this is the way.--
Sir boy, let me see your archery.
Look you draw home enough and 'tis there straight.--
Terras Astraea reliquit.
Be you remembered, Marcus, she's gone, she's fled.--
Sirs, take you to your tools. You, cousins, shall
Go sound the ocean and cast your nets;
Happily you may catch her in the sea;
Yet there's as little justice as at land.
No; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it.
'Tis you must dig with mattock and with spade,
And pierce the inmost center of the Earth.
Then, when you come to Pluto's region,
I pray you, deliver him this petition.
Tell him it is for justice and for aid,
And that it comes from old Andronicus,
Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome.
Ah, Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable
What time I threw the people's suffrages
On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me.
Go, get you gone, and pray be careful all,
And leave you not a man-of-war unsearched.
This wicked emperor may have shipped her hence,
And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice.

TITUS
Publius, how now? How now, my masters?
What, have you met with her?

TITUS
He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.
I'll dive into the burning lake below
And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.
Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we,
No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size,
But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,
Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can
bear;
And sith there's no justice in Earth nor hell,
We will solicit heaven and move the gods
To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs.
Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, Marcus.
"Ad Jovem," that's for you;--here, "Ad Apollinem";--
"Ad Martem," that's for myself;--
Here, boy, "to Pallas";--here, "to Mercury";--
"To Saturn," Caius--not to Saturnine!
You were as good to shoot against the wind.
To it, boy!--Marcus, loose when I bid.
Of my word, I have written to effect;
There's not a god left unsolicited.

TITUS
Now, masters, draw.  O, well said,
Lucius!
Good boy, in Virgo's lap! Give it Pallas.

TITUS
Ha, ha! Publius, Publius, what hast thou done?
See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns!

TITUS
Why, there it goes. God give his Lordship joy!

TITUS
Sirrah, come hither. Make no more ado,
But give your pigeons to the Emperor.
By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.
Hold, hold; meanwhile here's money for thy
charges.--Give me pen and ink.--Sirrah, can you
with a grace deliver up a supplication?

TITUS
Sirrah, hast thou a knife? Come, let me see it.--
Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration,
For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.--
And when thou hast given it to the Emperor,
Knock at my door and tell me what he says.