HAMLET  Safely stowed.

HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.

HAMLET
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

HAMLET  Do not believe it.

HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
shall be dry again.

HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
foolish ear.

HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King is a thing--

HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
all after!

HAMLET  At supper.

HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
That's the end.

HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
worm.

HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
progress through the guts of a beggar.

HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stairs into the lobby.

HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	

HAMLET  For England?

HAMLET  Good.

HAMLET
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
England.
Farewell, dear mother.

HAMLET
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Come, for England.	

HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?

HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?

HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?

HAMLET
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?

HAMLET
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.

HAMLET
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.

HAMLET
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
wisdom
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!