HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
sings in grave-making.

HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
hath the daintier sense.

HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
might it not?

HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
might it not?

HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
ache to think on 't.

HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?

HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
Whose grave's this, sirrah?

HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.

HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
liest.

HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?

HAMLET  What woman then?

HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?

HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
grave-maker?

HAMLET  How long is that since?

HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

HAMLET  Why?

HAMLET  How came he mad?

HAMLET  How "strangely"?

HAMLET  Upon what ground?

HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?

HAMLET  Why he more than another?

HAMLET  Whose was it?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not.

HAMLET  This?

HAMLET,   Let me see. Alas, poor
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
fashion i' th' earth?

HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	

HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!

HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

HAMLET,   What, the fair Ophelia?

HAMLET, 
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.

HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.

HAMLET
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!

HAMLET
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
thyself,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
I'll rant as well as thou.

HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.

HAMLET
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?

HAMLET
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
And praised be rashness for it: let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
us
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will--

HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery--an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.

HAMLET
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?

HAMLET
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Th' effect of what I wrote?

HAMLET
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.

HAMLET
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.

HAMLET
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.

HAMLET
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
damned
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?

HAMLET
It will be short. The interim's mine,
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow'ring passion.

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. 
Dost know this waterfly?

HAMLET,   Thy state is the more gracious,
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
head.

HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
northerly.

HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
my complexion.

HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. 
Osric to put on his hat.

HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
nothing more.

HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
gentleman in our more rawer breath?

HAMLET,   What imports the nomination of
this gentleman?

HAMLET  Of him, sir.

HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
would not much approve me. Well, sir?

HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
were to know himself.

HAMLET  What's his weapon?

HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--

HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?

HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
all "impawned," as you call it?

HAMLET  How if I answer no?

HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
hits.

HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
nature will.

HAMLET  Yours.  He does well to commend
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
turn.

HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
them through and through the most fanned
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.

HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
now.

HAMLET  In happy time.

HAMLET  She well instructs me.	

HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
about my heart. But it is no matter.

HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.

HAMLET, 
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
knows,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
And hurt my brother.

HAMLET  I embrace it freely
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
Give us the foils. Come on.

HAMLET
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.

HAMLET  No, by this hand.

HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.

HAMLET
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

HAMLET  Come on, sir.

HAMLET  One.

HAMLET  Judgment!

HAMLET
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Come.  Another hit. What say you?

HAMLET  Good madam.

HAMLET
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.

HAMLET
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

HAMLET  Nay, come again.

HAMLET
How does the Queen?

HAMLET
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	
Treachery! Seek it out.

HAMLET
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
work.	

HAMLET
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Follow my mother.	

HAMLET
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.

HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
What warlike noise is this?

HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
But I do prophesy th' election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
O, O, O, O!