vows such revenge as she hath deigned to say?why then i see that heaven applies our drift,and all the saints
solicitingfor vengeance on those cursed murderers.madam, tis true, and now i find it so,i found a letter, written in your
pardon, bel-imperia,my fear and care in not believing it;nor think i thoughtless think upon a mean ... to let his
... to let his death be unrevenged at full:and here i vow -- so you but give consent,and will conceal
-- so you but give consent,and will conceal my resolution --i will erelong determine of their deathsthat causeless thus have
deathsthat causeless thus have murdered my son.: on then; whatsoever i devise,let me entreat you, grace my practices: ... for
head.here they are. : aye, my lord; such courting as, i promise you,she hath my heart, but you, my lord,
this all?: why then, i'll fit you; say no more.when i was young, i gave my mind ... and plied
you are too quick with us): --when in toledo there i studied,it was my chance to write a tragedy,see here,
write a tragedy,see here, my lords -- which, long forgot, i found this other day.now would your lordships favor me
... as but to grace me with your acting it --i mean each one of you to play a part
play without a woman in it?: why this is well: i tell you, lordings,it was determined to have been acted
scholars too,such as could tell what to speak.: that shall i roundly. the chronicles of spainrecord this written of a
a mountain-top, and hung himself. ... : oh, that will i, my lords, make no doubt of it:i'll play the
my lords, make no doubt of it:i'll play the murderer, i warrant you;for i have already conceited that.: great soliman,
may breed the more variety:as you, my lord, in latin, i in greek,you in italian, and for because i knowthat
for the conclusionshall prove the intention, and all was good:and i myself in an oration,and with a strange and wondrous
in an oration,and with a strange and wondrous show besides,that i will have there behind a curtain,assure yourself, shall make
ta'en in tediousness.: you'll ply this gear?: why so:now shall i see the fall of babylon,wrought by the heavens in
for :here break we off our sundry languages,and thus conclude i in our vulgar tongue.happily you think -- but bootless
minute starting up again,revive to please tomorrow's audience.no, princes; know i am ,the hopeless father of a hapless son,whose tongue
boy,in black dark night, to pale dim, cruel death.he shrieks: i heard, and yet, methinks, i hearhis dismal out-cry echo
i hearhis dismal out-cry echo in the air.with soonest speed i hasted to the noise, ... where hanging on a
hasted to the noise, ... where hanging on a tree i found my son,through-girt with wounds, and slaughtered as you
my son,through-girt with wounds, and slaughtered as you see.and grieved i (think you) at this spectacle?speak, portuguese, whose loss resembles
loss resembles mine:if thou canst weep upon thy balthazar,tis like i wailed for my horatio.and you, my l, whose reconciled
play's catastrophe?and here behold this bloody handkercher,which at horatio's death i weeping dippedwithin the river of his bleeding wounds.it is
dippedwithin the river of his bleeding wounds.it is propitious, see, i have reserved,and never hath it left my bloody heart,soliciting
performed, my heart is satisfied.and to this end the bashaw i became,that might revenge me on lorenzo's life, ... who
to the part,and was to represent the knight of rhodes,that i might kill him more conveniently.so, viceroy, was thus balthazar,
... for though the story saith she should have died,yet i of kindness, and of care to her,did otherwise determine
any of the actors gone before. ... and, gentles, thus i end my play;urge no more words, i have no
no more words, i have no more to say.: viceroy, i will not trust thee with my life,which i this
by lorenzo slain, ... and by lorenzo and that balthazaram i at last revenged thoroughly,upon whose souls may heavens be
kings affordthan harmless silence? then afford it me. ... sufficeth, i may not, nor i will not tell thee.: indeed
horatio:but never shall thou force me to revealthe thing which i have vowed inviolate.and therefore, in despite of all thy
sure they are dead?: what, and yours too?: nay, then i care not; come, and we shall be friends;let us
them all.: secure? why doest thou wonder at it? ... i tell thee, viceroy, this day i have seen revenge,and
a prouder monarchthan ever sat under the crown of spain.had i as many lives as there be stars,as many heavens
lives,i'd give them all, aye, and my soul to boot,but i would see thee ride in this red pool.: oh,
by lorenzo slain, ... and by lorenzo and that balthazaram i at last revenged thoroughly,upon whose souls may heavens be
be yet avengedwith greater far than these afflictions.: methinks, since i grew inward with revenge, ... i cannot look with
do; and meantime i'll torture you.you had a son (as i take it), and your sonshould ha'e been married to
lived,he might a come to wear the crown of spain --i thinke 'twas so: 'twas i that killed him; ...
your more valiant son did take him prisoner.: now do i applaud what i have acted. ... nunc iners cadat
