,but live t'effect thy resolution.i therefore will by circumstances try,what i can gather, to confirm this writ;and hearkening near the
hearkening near the duke of castile's house, ... close, if i can, with bel-imperia,to listen more but nothing to bewray.
where's thy lady?: my lord --: nay, nay, my lord, i thank you, it shall not need;i had a suit
late,and her disgrace makes me unfortunate.: oh no, my lord; i dare not; it must not be:i humbly thank your
a toy.: y' faith, my lord, tis an idle thing i must confess,i ha' been too slack, too tardy, too
unjustly we,for all our wrongs, can compass no redress.but shall i never live to see the day,that i may come
my cares allay?this toils my body, this consumeth age,that only i to all men just must be,and neither gods nor
thou shalt find it so;for blood with blood shall, while i sit as judge,be satisfied, and the law discharged.and though
the law discharged.and though myself cannot receive the like,yet will i see that others have their right.dispatch: the fault's approved
by our law he is condemned to die. ... : i have not seen a wretch so impudent.oh monstrous times,
makes me to remember thee, my son. : where shall i run to breathe abroad my woes,my woes, whose weight
and give my words no way.: well, what of him?: i warrant thee, give it me.: aye, aye.: and yet,
somewhat nearer me concerns,i will, to ease the grief that i sustain, ... take truce with sorrow while i read
take truce with sorrow while i read on this.'my lord, i write as mine extremes required,that you would labor my
delivery;if you neglect, my life is desperate,and in my death i shall reveal the troth.you know, my lord, i slew
thou,of whom my son, my son deserved so well?what have i heard, what have mine eyes beheld?oh sacred heavens, may
long concealed,shall thus by this be venged or revealed?now see i what i durst not then suspect,that bel-imperia's letter was
falsely they have wrongedboth her, myself, horatio, and themselves.now may i make compare 'twixt hers and this,of every accident i
this,of every accident i ne'er could findtil now, and now i feelingly perceivethey did what heaven unpunished would not leave.oh
day and place where he did pity thee.but wherefore waste i mine unfruitful words,when naught but blood will satisfy my
ha! farewell, good ha, ha, ha. : now, sir, perhaps i come and see the king;the king sees me, and
seld-seen thing,that standers-by with toys should strike me mute?go to, i see their shifts and say no more., tis time
or that way -- soft and fair, not so:for if i hang or kill myself, let's knowwho will revenge horatio's
justice, oh, justice to .: oh, is he so?: not i. beware; goe by, goe by.: horatio, who calls horatio?
to strive;needs must he go that the devils drive. : i pry through every crevice of each wall,look on each
the water and stare up to heaven: ... yet cannot i behold my son horatio. --how now, who's there? spirits,
in the dark?: no, no, you are deceived -- not i -- you are deceived.was i so mad to bid
shine.: villain, thou liest, and thou dost noughtbut tell me i am mad: thou liest, i am not mad!i know
pedro, and he jaques.i'll prove it to thee; and were i mad, how could i?where was she that same night
in my boy's face there was a kind of grace,that i know -- nay, i do know -- had the
nothing here;i do not cry: ask pedro, and ask jaques;not i, indeed; we are very merry, very merry.isabella: how? be
say what: let her weep it out.this was the tree; i set it of a kernel:and when our hot spain
and the human sapbegan to wither, duly twice a morningwould i be sprinkling it with fountain-water.at last it grew, and
come in. one knows not what may chance:gods will that i should set this tree -- but even somasters' ungrateful
why, thou scornful villain?how, where, or by what means should i be blest? ... : oh ambitious beggar, wouldst thou
not as thine? that's a lieas massy as the earth: i had a sonwhose least unvalued hair did weigha thousand
weigha thousand of thy son's: and he was murdered.: nor i, nor i: but this same one of minewas worth
like to two lions reaved of their young.go in a-doors, i say. come, let's talk wisely now. was thy son
your oilcolors matted, and draw me five years younger than i am --do ye see, sir, let five years go,
thus, sir. do you see? may it be done?: nay, i pray, mark me, sir: then, sir, would i have
tottering, asyou know the wind will wave a man, and i with a trice to cuthim down. and looking upon
there is no end: the end is death and madness.as i am never better than when i am mad; then
am never better than when i am mad; then methinks i ama brave fellow; then i do wonders: but reason
of the murderers; were he as strong as hector,thus would i tear and drag him up and drown.: vindicta mihi!aye,
comfort be,heaven covereth him that hath no burial.and to conclude, i will revenge his death, ... but how? not as
time.and therefore all times fit not for revengethus therefore will i rest me in unrest,dissembling quiet in unquietness, ... not
me in unrest,dissembling quiet in unquietness, ... not seeming that i know their villainies,that my simplicity may make them thinkthat
know their villainies,that my simplicity may make them thinkthat ignorantly i will let all slip:for ignorance, i wot, and well
what noise? what coil is that you keep? : that i should plead their several actions?why, let them enter, and
near, you men, that thus importune me. -- now must i bear a face of gravity,for thus i used, before
give place. ... : content you, sirs; are you determinedthat i should plead your several actions?: but wherefore stands yon
be content.here, take my handercher, and wipe thine eyes,whiles wretched i in thy mishaps may seethe lively portrait of my
dying self.oh no, not this; horatio, this was thine;and when i dyed it in thy dearest blood,this was a token
token twixt thy soul and me,that of thy death revenged i should be.but here, take this, and this -- what,
grantrevenge on them that murdered my son. ... then will i rent and tear them, thus, and thus,shivering their limbs
limbs in pieces with my teeth. : that cannot be, i gave it never a wound;show me one drop of
drop of blood fall from the same:how is it possible i should slay it then? ... tush, no; run after,
is remiss,and seeks not vengeance for horatio's death.: aye, now i know thee, now thou namest thy son; ... thou
the lively image of my grief;within thy face, my sorrows i may see.thy eyes are gummed with tears, thy cheeks
all this sorrow riseth for thy son;and self-same sorrow feel i for my son.come in, old man, thou shalt to
in, old man, thou shalt to isabel;lean on my arm; i thee, thou me, shalt stay, ... and thou, and
i thee, thou me, shalt stay, ... and thou, and i and she will sing a song,three parts in one,
device have they devised, trow?pocas palabras, mild as the lamb:is't i will be revenged? no, i am not the man.:
be revenged? no, i am not the man.: my lords, i thank you for horatio.: what, so short?then i'll be
thank you for horatio.: what, so short?then i'll be gone, i thank you for't.: with me, sir? why my lord,
i thank you for't.: with me, sir? why my lord, i thought you had done.: why, is not this a
suchas love not me, and hate my lord too much.should i suspect lorenzo would preventor cross my suit, that loved
cross my suit, that loved my son so well?my lord, i am ashamed it should be said.: my good lord,
i am ashamed it should be said.: my good lord, i know you did not.: aye, marry, my lord, and
