thus have murdered my son.: on then; whatsoever i devise,let me entreat you, grace my practices: ... for why the
my good lords, assure yourselves of me;for you have given me cause; aye, by my faith, have you.: is this
forgot, i found this other day.now would your lordships favor me so much ... as but to grace me with
the huntress,which to your discretion shall seem best.and as for me, my lords, i'll look to one,and with the ransom
fit for common wits:but to present a kingly troop withal,give me a stately-written tragedy;tragedia cothurnata, fitting kings,containing matter, and not
that all things may go well.but, good my lord, let me entreat your graceto give the king the copy of
what we show.: one thing more, my good lord.: let me entreat your grace ... that, when the train are
train are passed into the gallery,you would vouchsafe to throw me down the key.: what, are you ready, balthazar?bring a
'erasto, soliman saluteth thee, ... and lets thee wit by me his highness' will,which is, thou shouldest be thus employed.'
your looks urge instance of these words;behold the reason urging me to this: see here my show, look on this
decayed with this.from forth these wounds came breath that gave me life;they murdered me that made these fatal marks.the cause
reconciled sonmarched in a net, and thought himself unseen,and rated me for brain-sick lunacy,with 'god amend that mad ,' ...
satisfied.and to this end the bashaw i became,that might revenge me on lorenzo's life, ... who therefore was appointed to
was resolved to die?: oh, good words: as dear to me was my horatio,as yours, or yours, or yours, my
lesser liberty can kings affordthan harmless silence? then afford it me. ... sufficeth, i may not, nor i will not
nor i will not tell thee.: indeed thou mayest torment me, as his wretched sonhath done in murd'ring my horatio:but
sonhath done in murd'ring my horatio:but never shall thou force me to revealthe thing which i have vowed inviolate.and therefore,
in this red pool.: oh, good words: as dear to me was my horatio,as yours, or yours, or yours, my
