my vexed soul,and with the wounds of my distressful sonsolicits me for notice of his death.the ugly fiends do sally
discontents records,early begins to register my dreams, ... and drive me forth to seek the murtherer.eyes, life, world, heavens, hell,
the life of my beloved son,and of his death behoves me be revenged:then hazard not thine own, ,but live t'effect
a suit unto her, but too late,and her disgrace makes me unfortunate.: oh no, my lord; i dare not; it
just must be,and neither gods nor men be just to me. ... : so is't my duty to regard his
we came for: let's begin;for here lies that which bids me to be gone.: stand forth, thou monster, murderer of
foul should 'scape unpunished.dispatch, and see this execution done.this makes me to remember thee, my son. : where shall i
way.: well, what of him?: i warrant thee, give it me.: aye, aye.: and yet, though somewhat nearer me concerns,i
naught but blood will satisfy my woes?i will go plain me to my lord the king,and cry aloud for justice
doth bring confusion to them all.: the next way from me.: oh, hard by: tis yon house that you see.:
to him and where to find him out,then list to me, and i'll resolve your doubt.there is a path upon
sir, perhaps i come and see the king;the king sees me, and fain would hear my suit;why, is not this
a strange and seld-seen thing,that standers-by with toys should strike me mute?go to, i see their shifts and say no
knowwho will revenge horatio's murder then?no, no; fie, no: pardon me, i'll none of that.this way i'll take, and this
son, whom naught can ransom or redeem.: away, lorenzo, hinder me no more.for thou hast made me bankrupt of my
no more.for thou hast made me bankrupt of my bliss.give me my son; you shall not ransom him. ... away,
i so mad to bid you light your torches now?light me your torches at the mid of noon,whenas the sun-god
mid of noon,whenas the sun-god rides in all his glory:light me your torches then.: let it be burnt; night is
should shine.: villain, thou liest, and thou dost noughtbut tell me i am mad: thou liest, i am not mad!i
that comes before thine eyes?: art a painter? canst paint me a tear, or a wound,a groan or a sigh?
tear, or a wound,a groan or a sigh? canst paint me such a tree as this?: bazardo, afore-god, an excellent
fellow. look you,sir, do you see, i'd have you paint me my gallery, in your oilcolors matted, and draw me
like the marshal ofspain -- my wife isabella standing by me, with a speaking look tomy son horatio, which should
you see? may it be done?: nay, i pray, mark me, sir: then, sir, would i have youpaint me this
any case observe that. then,sir, after some violent noise, bring me forth in my shirt,and my gown under mine arm,
who calls ?'may it be done?: well, sir; then bring me forth, bring me through alleyand alley, still with a
you may a passion,there you may show a passion. draw me like old priam of troy,crying: 'the house is a-fire,
the house is a-fire, as the torch overmy head!' make me curse, make me rave, make me cry, makeme mad,
curse, make me rave, make me cry, makeme mad, make me well again, make me curse hell, invocateheaven, and in
make me curse hell, invocateheaven, and in the end leave me in a trance -- and so forth.: oh no,
all times fit not for revengethus therefore will i rest me in unrest,dissembling quiet in unquietness, ... not seeming that
and well they know,remedium malorum iners est.nor ought avails it me to menace themwho, as a wintry storm upon a
menace themwho, as a wintry storm upon a plain,will bear me down with their nobility.no, no, , thou must enjointhine
should plead their several actions?why, let them enter, and let me see them. ... : come near, you men, that
them. ... : come near, you men, that thus importune me. -- now must i bear a face of gravity,for
mournful eyes and hands to heaven upreared?come hither, father, let me know thy cause.: say, father, tell me what's thy
: that cannot be, i gave it never a wound;show me one drop of blood fall from the same:how is
should slay it then? ... tush, no; run after, catch me if you can.enters again, who, staring him the face,
on righteous rhadamanthfor just revenge against the murderers.: but let me look on my horatio.sweet boy, how art thou changed
fury art,sent from the empty kingdom of black night,to summon me to make appearancebefore grim minos and just rhadamanth,to plague
thou shalt to isabel;lean on my arm; i thee, thou me, shalt stay, ... and thou, and i and she
so short?then i'll be gone, i thank you for't.: with me, sir? why my lord, i thought you had done.:
noble lord?the hope of spain, mine honorable friend? ... grant me the combat of them if they dare:i'll meet him
of them if they dare:i'll meet him face-to-face, to tell me so.these be the scandalous reports of suchas love not
me so.these be the scandalous reports of suchas love not me, and hate my lord too much.should i suspect lorenzo
