should we term your dealings to be just, ... if you unjustly deal with those, that in your justice trust?the
lady?: my lord --: nay, nay, my lord, i thank you, it shall not need;i had a suit unto her,
not; it must not be:i humbly thank your lordship.: who? you, my lord?i reserve your favor for a greater honor;this
read on this.'my lord, i write as mine extremes required,that you would labor my delivery;if you neglect, my life is
them all with my revenging threats. : tis neither as you think, nor as you think,nor as you think; you're
way from me.: oh, hard by: tis yon house that you see.: who, my lord lorenzo?: oh, forbear,for other talk
oh, forbear,for other talk for us far fitter were.but if you be importunate to know ... the way to him
distrust and fear,a darksome place, and dangerous to pass:there shall you meet with melancholy thoughts,whose baleful humors if you but
melancholy thoughts,whose baleful humors if you but uphold,it will conduct you to despair and death:whose rocky cliffs when you have
hast made me bankrupt of my bliss.give me my son; you shall not ransom him. ... away, i'll rip the
go marshal up the fiends in hell,to be avenged on you all for this.: nay, soft and fair; you shall
son horatio. --how now, who's there? spirits, spirits?: what make you with your torches in the dark?: no, no, you
dark?: no, no, you are deceived -- not i -- you are deceived.was i so mad to bid you light
as this?: bazardo, afore-god, an excellent fellow. look you,sir, do you see, i'd have you paint me my gallery, in
son,' and my hand leaningupon his head, thus, sir. do you see? may it be done?: nay, i pray, mark
of my torch,find it to be my son horatio. there you may a passion,there you may show a passion. draw
and how. how now, what noise? what coil is that you keep? : that i should plead their several actions?why,
enter, and let me see them. ... : come near, you men, that thus importune me. -- now must i
what's the matter?: of battery?: give place. ... : content you, sirs; are you determinedthat i should plead your several
it then? ... tush, no; run after, catch me if you can.enters again, who, staring him the face, speaks.: and
no, i am not the man.: my lords, i thank you for horatio.: what, so short?then i'll be gone, i
for horatio.: what, so short?then i'll be gone, i thank you for't.: with me, sir? why my lord, i thought
you for't.: with me, sir? why my lord, i thought you had done.: why, is not this a miserable thing,
ashamed it should be said.: my good lord, i know you did not.: aye, marry, my lord, and shall.friends, quoth
lord, and shall.friends, quoth he? see, i'll be friends with you all:specially with you, my lovely lord;for divers causes it
