death be unrevenged at full:and here i vow -- so you but give consent,and will conceal my resolution --i will
murdered my son.: on then; whatsoever i devise,let me entreat you, grace my practices: ... for why the plot's already
such courting as, i promise you,she hath my heart, but you, my lord, have hers.: my help?why, my good lords,
hers.: my help?why, my good lords, assure yourselves of me;for you have given me cause; aye, by my faith, have
you have given me cause; aye, by my faith, have you.: is this all?: why then, i'll fit you; say
to the world.: marry, my good lord, thus:(and yet, methinks, you are too quick with us): --when in toledo there
me with your acting it --i mean each one of you to play a part --assure you it will prove
of their wits in plays.: now, my good lord, could you entreatyour sister bel-imperia to make one?for what's a play
a woman in it?: why this is well: i tell you, lordings,it was determined to have been acted ... by
my lords, are several abstracts drawn, ... for each of you to note your parts,and act it, as occasion's offered
must provide a turkish cap,a black mustachio, and a falchion; you, with a cross, like to a knight of rhodes;and
with a cross, like to a knight of rhodes;and madam, you must attire yourself,like phoebe, flora, or the huntress,which to
his partin unknown languages,that it may breed the more variety:as you, my lord, in latin, i in greek,you in italian,
would vouchsafe to throw me down the key.: what, are you ready, balthazar?bring a chair and a cushion for the
-- what, is your beard on?: dispatch, for shame; are you so long? ... bethink thyself, ,recall thy wits, recompt
our sundry languages,and thus conclude i in our vulgar tongue.happily you think -- but bootless are your thoughts --that this
tree i found my son,through-girt with wounds, and slaughtered as you see.and grieved i (think you) at this spectacle?speak, portuguese,
weep upon thy balthazar,tis like i wailed for my horatio.and you, my l, whose reconciled sonmarched in a net, and
brain-sick lunacy,with 'god amend that mad ,' ... how can you brook our play's catastrophe?and here behold this bloody handkercher,which
my tongue, and afterwards my heart. ... : but are you sure they are dead?: what, and yours too?: nay,
thinke 'twas so: 'twas i that killed him; ... look you, this same hand 'twas it that stabbedhis heart --
-- do ye see? this hand --for one horatio, if you ever knew him:a youth, one that they hanged up
