now,the fair ophelia.--nymph, in thy orisonsbe all my sins remembered. i humbly thank you, well.no, not i. i never gave
was sometime a paradox, but nowthe time gives it proof. i did love you once. you should not have believed
so inoculate our old stock but we shallrelish of it. i loved you not. get thee to a nunnery. why
to a nunnery. why wouldst thou bea breeder of sinners? i am myself indifferent honest,but yet i could accuse me
things that itwere better my mother had not borne me: i amvery proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offensesat my beck
amvery proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offensesat my beck than i have thoughts to put themin, imagination to give them
or time to actthem in. what should such fellows as i do crawlingbetween earth and heaven? we are arrant knavesall;
make of them. to a nunnery, go, andquickly too. farewell. i have heard of your paintings too, wellenough. god hath
to, i'll nomore on 't. it hath made me mad. i say we will haveno more marriage. those that are
keep as they are.to a nunnery, go. speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronouncedit to you, trippingly on
but if you mouthit, as many of our players do, i had as lief thetown-crier spoke my lines. nor do
use all gently;for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as i may say,whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire andbeget
part are capable of nothing but inexplicabledumb shows and noise. i would have such a fellowwhipped for o'erdoing termagant. it
gait ofchristian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted andbellowed that i have thought some of nature'sjourneymen had made men, and
manas e'er my conversation coped withal. nay, do not think i flatter,for what advancement may i hope from theethat no
please. give me that manthat is not passion's slave, and i will wear himin my heart's core, ay, in my
himin my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,as i do thee.--something too much of this.--there is a play
before the king.one scene of it comes near the circumstancewhich i have told thee of my father's death.i prithee, when
imaginations are as foulas vulcan's stithy. give him heedful note,for i mine eyes will rivet to his face,and, after, we
censure of his seeming. they are coming to the play. i must be idle.get you a place. excellent, i' faith,
feedcapons so. no, nor mine now. my lord, youplayed once i' th' university, you say? what did you enact? it
players ready? no, good mother. here's metal moreattractive. lady, shall i lie in your lap? i mean, my head upon
i mean, my head upon your lap? do you think i meant country matters? that's a fair thought to lie
that's a fair thought to lie between maids'legs. nothing. who, i? o god, your only jig-maker. what should aman do
no, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. nooffense i' th' world. "the mousetrap." marry, how? tropically.this play is
us not. let the galled jade wince;our withers are unwrung. i could interpret between you and your love,if i could
come, the croaking raven doth bellow forrevenge. he poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. hisname's gonzago. the story
put him tohis purgation would perhaps plunge him into morecholer. i am tame, sir. pronounce. you are welcome. sir, i
a wholesome answer. my wit'sdiseased. but, sir, such answer as i can make, youshall command--or, rather, as you say, my
us? and do still, by these pickers and stealers. sir, i lack advancement. ay, sir, but "while the grass grows"--theproverb
ay, sir, but "while the grass grows"--theproverb is something musty. i do not well understand that. will you playupon this
do not well understand that. will you playupon this pipe? i pray you. i do beseech you. it is as
organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'sblood,do you think i am easier to be played on than a pipe?call
it is like a weasel. or like a whale. then i will come to my mother by and by. they
yawn and hell itself breathesoutcontagion to this world. now could i drink hotbloodand do such bitter business as the daywould
be shent,to give them seals never, my soul, consent.now might i do it pat, now he is a-praying,and now i'll
do 't. and so he goes to heaven,and so am i revenged. that would be scanned:a villain kills my father,
circumstance and course of thought'tis heavy with him. and am i then revengedto take him in the purging of his
sit you down; you shall not budge.you go not till i set you up a glasswhere you may see the
a rat? dead for a ducat, dead.through the arras. nay, i know not. is it the king?a bloody deed--almost as
peace, sityou down,and let me wring your heart; for so i shallif it be made of penetrable stuff,if damned custom
with this piteous action you convertmy stern effects. then what i have to dowill want true color--tears perchance for blood.
keep timeand makes as healthful music. it is not madnessthat i have uttered. bring me to the test,and i the
it soto punish me with this and this with me,that i must be their scourge and minister.i will bestow him
and minister.i will bestow him and will answer wellthe death i gave him. so, again, good night.i must be cruel
behind.one word more, good lady.not this by no means that i bid you do:let the bloat king tempt you again
his damned fingers,make you to ravel all this matter outthat i essentially am not in madness,but mad in craft. 'twere
england, you know that.there's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,whom i will trust as i will adders fanged,they bear the
enginerhoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hardbut i will delve one yard below their minesand blow them
