they are sheep and calves which seek outassurance in that. i will speak to this fellow.--whose grave's this, sirrah? i
equivocation will undo us. by thelord, horatio, this three years i have took note ofit: the age is grown so
"strangely"? upon what ground? how long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot? why he more than
rot? why he more than another? whose was it? nay, i know not. this?, let me see. alas, pooryorick! i
is! my gorge rises at it. here hungthose lips that i have kissed i know not how oft.where be your
me one thing. dost thou think alexander looked o' thisfashion i' th' earth? and smelt so? pah! to what base
wand'ring stars and makes them standlike wonder-wounded hearers? this is i, the dane. thou pray'st not well. i prithee take
well. i prithee take thy fingers from my throat,for though i am not splenitive and rash,yet have i in me
something dangerous,which let thy wisdom fear. hold off thy hand.why, i will fight with him upon this themeuntil my eyelids
a kind of fightingthat would not let me sleep. methought i layworse than the mutines in the bilboes. rashly--and praised
from my cabin,my sea-gown scarfed about me, in the darkgroped i to find out them; had my desire,fingered their packet,
so bold(my fears forgetting manners) to unfoldtheir grand commission; where i found, horatio,a royal knavery--an exact command,larded with many several
read it at more leisure.but wilt thou hear now how i did proceed?being thus benetted round with villainies,or i could
make a prologue to my brains,they had begun the play. i sat me down,devised a new commission, wrote it fair--i
did me yeoman's service. wilt thou knowth' effect of what i wrote?an earnest conjuration from the king,as england was his
mine,and a man's life's no more than to say "one."but i am very sorry, good horatio,that to laertes i forgot
laertes i forgot myself,for by the image of my cause i seethe portraiture of his. i'll court his favors.but, sure,
bravery of his grief did put meinto a tow'ring passion. i humbly thank you, sir. dost know this waterfly?, thy
shall stand at the king's mess. 'tis a chough,but, as i say, spacious in the possession of dirt. i will
yet methinks it is very sultry and hot formy complexion. i beseech you, remember. osric to put on his hat.
his hat. sir, his definement suffers no perdition inyou, though i know to divide him inventoriallywould dozy th' arithmetic of
respect of his quick sail. but, in theverity of extolment, i take him to be a soul of greatarticle, and
breath?, what imports the nomination ofthis gentleman? of him, sir. i would you did, sir. yet, in faith, if you
if you did, itwould not much approve me. well, sir? i dare not confess that, lest i should comparewith him
why is thisall "impawned," as you call it? how if i answer no? sir, i will walk here in the
be brought, the gentleman willing, and theking hold his purpose, i will win for him, an i can.if not, i
thus has he (and many more of the samebreed that i know the drossy age dotes on) only gotthe tune
do but blow them totheir trial, the bubbles are out. i am constant to my purposes. they followthe king's pleasure.
if his fitness speaks, mine isready now or whensoever, provided i be so able asnow. in happy time. she well
so able asnow. in happy time. she well instructs me. i do not think so. since he went into france,
since he went into france, ihave been in continual practice. i shall win at theodds; but thou wouldst not think
to leave betimes? let be., give me your pardon, sir. i have done you wrong;but pardon 't as you are
a gentleman. this presenceknows,and you must needs have heard, how i am punishedwith a sore distraction. what i have donethat
i have donethat might your nature, honor, and exceptionroughly awake, i here proclaim was madness.was 't wronged laertes? never .if
purposed evilfree me so far in your most generous thoughtsthat i have shot my arrow o'er the houseand hurt my
have shot my arrow o'er the houseand hurt my brother. i embrace it freelyand will this brothers' wager frankly play.--give
foil, laertes; in mine ignoranceyour skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,stick fiery off indeed. no, by this
union here?follow my mother. heaven make thee free of it. i follow thee.--i am dead, horatio.--wretched queen, adieu.--you that look
this chance,that are but mutes or audience to this act,had i but time (as this fell sergeant, death,is strict in
(as this fell sergeant, death,is strict in his arrest), o, i could tell you--but let it be.--horatio, i am dead.thou
god, horatio, what a wounded name,things standing thus unknown, shall i leave behindme!if thou didst ever hold me in thy
in painto tell my story.what warlike noise is this? o, i die, horatio!the potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.i cannot
my spirit.i cannot live to hear the news from england.but i do prophesy th' election lightson fortinbras; he has my
