well, god-a-mercy. excellent well. you are a fishmonger. then i would you were so honest a man. ay, sir.
a good kissing carrion--have you adaughter? let her not walk i' th' sun. conception is ablessing, but, as your daughter
lack ofwit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,though i most powerfully and potently believe, yet ihold it not
it thus set down; foryourself, sir, shall grow old as i am, if, like a crab,you could go backward. into
makes itso. to me, it is a prison. o god, i could be bounded in a nutshell andcount myself a
andcount myself a king of infinite space, were it notthat i have bad dreams. a dream itself is but a
beggars' shadows.shall we to th' court? for, by my fay, i cannotreason. no such matter. i will not sort you
my servants, for, to speak to you like anhonest man, i am most dreadfully attended. but,in the beaten way of
beaten way of friendship, what make you atelsinore? beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks;but i thank
in your lookswhich your modesties have not craft enough tocolor. i know the good king and queen have sent foryou.
me whether you were sent for or no., nay, then, i have an eye of you.--ifyou love me, hold not
have an eye of you.--ifyou love me, hold not off. i will tell you why; so shall my anticipationprevent your
and your secrecy to theking and queen molt no feather. i have of late, butwherefore i know not, lost all
seem to say so. why did you laugh, then, when i said "mandelights not me"? he that plays the king
both ways. do they hold the same estimation they didwhen i was in the city? are they so followed? how
you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,which, i tell you, must show fairly outwards, shouldmore appear like
than yours. you arewelcome. but my uncle-father and aunt-mother aredeceived. i am but mad north-north-west. when thewind is southerly, i
you see there isnot yet out of his swaddling clouts. i will prophesy he comes to tell me of theplayers;
say right, sir, a mondaymorning, 'twas then indeed. my lord, i have news to tell you: when rosciuswas an actor
daughter, and no more,the which he loved passing well. am i not i' th' right, old jephthah? nay, that follows
chanson will show youmore, for look where my abridgment comes. i heard thee speak me a speech once, but itwas
acted, or, if it was, not above once; forthe play, i remember, pleased not the million:'twas caviary to the general.
in the scenes, set down with as muchmodesty as cunning. i remember one said therewere no sallets in the lines
aneed, study a speech of some dozen or sixteenlines, which i would set down and insert in 't,could you not?
night. you are welcome to elsinore.ay, so, good-bye to you.now i am alone.o, what a rogue and peasant slave am
he dohad he the motive and the cue for passionthat i have? he would drown the stage with tearsand cleave
property and most dear lifea damned defeat was made. am i a coward?who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?plucks
my face?tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throatas deep as to the lungs? who does
deep as to the lungs? who does me this?ha! 'swounds, i should take it! for it cannot bebut i am
bawdy villain!remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindlessvillain!o vengeance!why, what an ass am i! this is most brave,that i, the son of a
a very drab,a stallion! fie upon 't! foh!about, my brains!--hum, i have heardthat guilty creatures sitting at a playhave, by
if he do blench,i know my course. the spirit that i have seenmay be a devil, and the devil hath
