more than kin and less than kind.not so, my lord; i am too much in the sun.ay, madam, it is
the sun.ay, madam, it is common."seems," madam? nay, it is. i know not "seems."'tis not alone my inky cloak, good
indeed "seem,"for they are actions that a man might play;but i have that within which passes show,these but the trappings
winds of heavenvisit her face too roughly. heaven and earth,must i remember? why, she would hang on himas if increase
with myuncle,my father's brother, but no more like my fatherthan i to hercules. within a month,ere yet the salt of
nor it cannot come to good.but break, my heart, for i must hold my tongue. i am glad to see
hold my tongue. i am glad to see you well.horatio--or i do forget myself!sir, my good friend. i'll change that
that violenceto make it truster of your own reportagainst yourself. i know you are no truant.but what is your affair
the funeral baked meatsdid coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.would i had met my dearest foe in heavenor ever i
in heavenor ever i had seen that day, horatio!my father--methinks i see my father. in my mind's eye, horatio.he was
frowningly? pale or red? and fixed his eyes upon you? i would i had been there. very like. stayed it
very like. stayed it long? his beard was grizzled, no? i will watch tonight.perchance 'twill walk again.if it assume my
though hell itself should gapeand bid me hold my peace. i pray you all,if you have hitherto concealed this sight,let
his pledge. ay, marry, is 't,but, to my mind, though i am native hereand to the manner born, it is
that too much o'erleavensthe form of plausive manners--that these men,carrying, i say, the stamp of one defect,being nature's livery or
intents wicked or charitable,thou com'st in such a questionable shapethat i will speak to thee. i'll call thee ",""king," "father,"
this? wherefore? what should we do?it will not speak. then i will follow it. why, what should be the fear?i
in this bodyas hardy as the nemean lion's nerve.still am i called. unhand me, gentlemen.by heaven, i'll make a ghost
follow thee.whither wilt thou lead me? speak. i'll go nofurther. i will. alas, poor ghost! speak. i am bound to
hear. what? o god! murder?haste me to know 't, that i, with wings as swiftas meditation or the thoughts of
all you host of heaven! o earth! what else?and shall i couple hell? o fie! hold, hold, my heart,and you,
pernicious woman!o villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!my tables--meet it is i set it downthat one may smile and smile and
one may smile and smile and be a villain.at least i am sure it may be so in denmark.so, uncle,
this that you have heard.well said, old mole. canst work i' th' earth so fast?--a worthy pioner! once more remove,
before, never, so help you mercy,how strange or odd some'er i bear myself(as i perchance hereafter shall think meetto put
need help you.rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--so, gentlemen,with all my love i do commend me to you,and what so poor a
us go in together,and still your fingers on your lips, i pray.the time is out of joint. o cursed spitethat
pray.the time is out of joint. o cursed spitethat ever i was born to set it right!nay, come, let's go
