i did love you once. you should not have believed me, for virtuecannot so inoculate our old stock but we
sinners? i am myself indifferent honest,but yet i could accuse me of such things that itwere better my mother had
such things that itwere better my mother had not borne me: i amvery proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offensesat my
ignorance. go to, i'll nomore on 't. it hath made me mad. i say we will haveno more marriage. those
andbeget a temperance that may give it smoothness. o,it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,periwig-pated fellow tear
pipe for fortune's fingerto sound what stop she please. give me that manthat is not passion's slave, and i will
of feathers (if therest of my fortunes turn turk with me) with twoprovincial roses on my razed shoes, get me
itself more richerto signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him tohis purgation would perhaps plunge him
why, look you now, how unworthy a thingyou make of me! you would play upon me, youwould seem to know
i am easier to be played on than a pipe?call me what instrument you will, though you canfret me, you
you will, though you canfret me, you cannot play upon me. do you see yonder cloud that's almost inshape of
will come to my mother by and by. they fool me to the top of my bent.--i willcome by and
let not everthe soul of nero enter this firm bosom.let me be cruel, not unnatural.i will speak daggers to her,
danger. leave wringing of your hands. peace, sityou down,and let me wring your heart; for so i shallif it be
healthful music. it is not madnessthat i have uttered. bring me to the test,and i the matter will reword, which
spread the compost on the weedsto make them ranker. forgive me this my virtue,for, in the fatness of these pursy
lordi do repent; but heaven hath pleased it soto punish me with this and this with me,that i must be
fanged,they bear the mandate; they must sweep my wayand marshal me to knavery. let it work,for 'tis the sport to
in one line two crafts directly meet.this man shall set me packing.i'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.mother, good
