another? whose was it? nay, i know not. this?, let me see. alas, pooryorick! i knew him, horatio--a fellow of
fellow of infinitejest, of most excellent fancy. he hath bore me on hisback a thousand times, and now how abhorred
favor she must come. make her laughat that.--prithee, horatio, tell me one thing. dost thou think alexander looked o' thisfashion
though i am not splenitive and rash,yet have i in me something dangerous,which let thy wisdom fear. hold off thy
my sum. what wilt thou do for her? 'swounds, show me what thou 't do.woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast,
crocodile?i'll do 't. dost thou come here to whine?to outface me with leaping in her grave?be buried quick with her,
thou. hear you, sir,what is the reason that you use me thus?i loved you ever. but it is no matter.let
heart there was a kind of fightingthat would not let me sleep. methought i layworse than the mutines in the
how we will-- up from my cabin,my sea-gown scarfed about me, in the darkgroped i to find out them; had
prologue to my brains,they had begun the play. i sat me down,devised a new commission, wrote it fair--i once did
labored muchhow to forget that learning; but, sir, nowit did me yeoman's service. wilt thou knowth' effect of what i
fell incensed pointsof mighty opposites.does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--he that hath killed my king and whored
bonnet to his right use: 'tis for thehead. no, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind isnortherly. but yet methinks
yet, in faith, if you did, itwould not much approve me. well, sir? i dare not confess that, lest i
please hismajesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. letthe foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and theking
be so able asnow. in happy time. she well instructs me. i do not think so. since he went into
leavesknows, what is 't to leave betimes? let be., give me your pardon, sir. i have done you wrong;but pardon
enemy.sir, in this audiencelet my disclaiming from a purposed evilfree me so far in your most generous thoughtsthat i have
grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.this likes me well. these foils have all a length? come on,
your best violence.i am afeard you make a wanton of me. nay, come again.how does the queen?o villainy! ho! let
tell you--but let it be.--horatio, i am dead.thou livest; report me and my cause arightto the unsatisfied. as thou 'rt
my cause arightto the unsatisfied. as thou 'rt a man,give me the cup. let go! by heaven, i'll ha 't.o
thus unknown, shall i leave behindme!if thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,absent thee from felicity awhileand in this
