go backward. into my grave? you cannot, sir, take from me anything that iwill more willingly part withal--except my life,except
then is doomsday near. but your news is nottrue. let me question more in particular. whathave you, my good friends,
isnothing either good or bad but thinking makes itso. to me, it is a prison. o god, i could be
inclining? is it a free visitation?come, come, deal justly with me. come, come; nay,speak. anything but to th' purpose. you
king and queen have sent foryou. that you must teach me. but let me conjureyou by the rights of our
a betterproposer can charge you withal: be even and directwith me whether you were sent for or no., nay, then,
no., nay, then, i have an eye of you.--ifyou love me, hold not off. i will tell you why; so
heavilywith my disposition that this goodly frame, theearth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this mostexcellent canopy, the air, look
god: thebeauty of the world, the paragon of animals--andyet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? mandelights not me,
why did you laugh, then, when i said "mandelights not me"? he that plays the king shall be welcome--hismajesty shall
plays the king shall be welcome--hismajesty shall have tribute on me. the adventurousknight shall use his foil and target, the
come then. th' appurtenance of welcomeis fashion and ceremony. let me complywith you in this garb, lest my extent to
his swaddling clouts. i will prophesy he comes to tell me of theplayers; mark it.--you say right, sir, a mondaymorning,
for look where my abridgment comes. i heard thee speak me a speech once, but itwas never acted, or, if
slaughter. if it live in your memory, begin atthis line--let me see, let me see:the rugged pyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian
lifea damned defeat was made. am i a coward?who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?plucks off my beard and
across?plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th'
i' th' throatas deep as to the lungs? who does me this?ha! 'swounds, i should take it! for it cannot
and my melancholy,as he is very potent with such spirits,abuses me to damn me. i'll have groundsmore relative than this.
