well, god-a-mercy. excellent well. you are a fishmonger. then i would you were so
breed maggots in a deaddog, being a good kissing carrion--have you adaughter? let her not walk i' th' sun. conception
if, like a crab,you could go backward. into my grave? you cannot, sir, take from me anything that iwill more
how doyou both? nor the soles of her shoe? then you live about her waist, or in themiddle of her
news is nottrue. let me question more in particular. whathave you, my good friends, deserved at the hands offortune that
good friends, deserved at the hands offortune that she sends you to prison hither? denmark's a prison. a goodly one,
denmark being one o'th' worst. why, then, 'tis none to you, for there isnothing either good or bad but thinking
fay, i cannotreason. no such matter. i will not sort you with therest of my servants, for, to speak to
you with therest of my servants, for, to speak to you like anhonest man, i am most dreadfully attended. but,in
dreadfully attended. but,in the beaten way of friendship, what make you atelsinore? beggar that i am, i am even poor
i am, i am even poor in thanks;but i thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanksare too dear a
sure, dear friends, my thanksare too dear a halfpenny. were you not sent for?is it your own inclining? is it
with me. come, come; nay,speak. anything but to th' purpose. you were sentfor, and there is a kind of confession
know the good king and queen have sent foryou. that you must teach me. but let me conjureyou by the
ever-preservedlove, and by what more dear a betterproposer can charge you withal: be even and directwith me whether you were
of you.--ifyou love me, hold not off. i will tell you why; so shall my anticipationprevent your discovery, and your
me a sterile promontory; this mostexcellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhangingfirmament, this majestical roof, frettedwith golden fire--why,
mandelights not me, no, nor women neither, though byyour smiling you seem to say so. why did you laugh, then,
this more than natural,if philosophy could find it out. gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore.your hands, come then. th' appurtenance
th' appurtenance of welcomeis fashion and ceremony. let me complywith you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,which,
this garb, lest my extent to the players,which, i tell you, must show fairly outwards, shouldmore appear like entertainment than
must show fairly outwards, shouldmore appear like entertainment than yours. you arewelcome. but my uncle-father and aunt-mother aredeceived. i am
is southerly, i know a hawk from a handsaw. hark you, guildenstern, and you too--ateach ear a hearer! that great
guildenstern, and you too--ateach ear a hearer! that great baby you see there isnot yet out of his swaddling clouts.
'twas then indeed. my lord, i have news to tell you: when rosciuswas an actor in rome-- buzz, buzz. then
nay, that follows not. why,as by lot, god wotand then, you know,it came to pass, as most like it was--the
eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhusold grandsire priam seeks.so, proceed you. it shall to the barber's with your beard.--prithee say
thee speak out the rest ofthis soon.--good my lord, will you see the playerswell bestowed? do you hear, let them
the abstract and brief chronicles of thetime. after your death you were better have a badepitaph than their ill report
were better have a badepitaph than their ill report while you live. god's bodykins, man, much better! use everyman after
play "the murder of gonzago"? we'll ha 't tomorrow night. you could, for aneed, study a speech of some dozen
sixteenlines, which i would set down and insert in 't,could you not? very well. follow that lord--and look youmock him
that lord--and look youmock him not. my good friends,i'll leave you till night. you are welcome to elsinore.ay, so, good-bye
