the suits of woe.i shall in all my best obey you, madam.o, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,thaw,
i must hold my tongue. i am glad to see you well.horatio--or i do forget myself!sir, my good friend. i'll
good friend. i'll change that name with you.and what make you from wittenberg, horatio?--marcellus?i am very glad to see you.
glad to see you. goodeven, sir.--but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg?i would not hear your enemy say so,nor
from wittenberg?i would not hear your enemy say so,nor shall you do my ear that violenceto make it truster of
make it truster of your own reportagainst yourself. i know you are no truant.but what is your affair in elsinore?we'll
are no truant.but what is your affair in elsinore?we'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.i prithee, do not
for god's love, let me hear! but where was this?did you not speak to it? 'tis very strange. indeed, sirs,
it? 'tis very strange. indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.hold you the watch tonight?armed, say you? from top to toe?
watch tonight?armed, say you? from top to toe? then saw you not his face? what, looked he frowningly? pale or
he frowningly? pale or red? and fixed his eyes upon you? i would i had been there. very like. stayed
itself should gapeand bid me hold my peace. i pray you all,if you have hitherto concealed this sight,let it be
understanding but no tongue.i will requite your loves. so fare you well.upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,i'll visit you.your
'twixt eleven and twelve,i'll visit you.your loves, as mine to you. farewell.my father's spirit--in arms! all is not well.i doubt
to my revenge. o, my prophetic soul! my uncle!o all you host of heaven! o earth! what else?and shall i
shall i couple hell? o fie! hold, hold, my heart,and you, my sinews, grow not instant old,but bear me stiffly
am sure it may be so in denmark.so, uncle, there you are. now to my word.it is "adieu, adieu, remember
hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come! o, wonderful! no, you will reveal it.how say you, then? would heart of
dwelling in all denmarkbut he's an arrant knave. why, right, you are in the right.and so, without more circumstance at
own poor part,i will go pray.i am sorry they offend you, heartily;yes, faith, heartily.yes, by saint patrick, but there is,
your desire to know what is between us,o'ermaster 't as you may. and now, good friends,as you are friends, scholars,
scholars, and soldiers,give me one poor request.never make known what you have seen tonight. nay, but swear 't.upon my sword.
indeed.ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? art thou there,truepenny?come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.consent to swear.never to
in the cellarage.consent to swear.never to speak of this that you have seen,swear by my sword.hic et ubique? then we'll
my sword.swear by my swordnever to speak of this that you have heard.well said, old mole. canst work i' th'
in your philosophy. but come.here, as before, never, so help you mercy,how strange or odd some'er i bear myself(as i
perchance hereafter shall think meetto put an antic disposition on)that you, at such times seeing me, never shall,with arms encumbered
"there be an if theymight,"or such ambiguous giving-out, to notethat you know aught of me--this do swear,so grace and mercy
