regard their currents turn awryand lose the name of action.--soft you now,the fair ophelia.--nymph, in thy orisonsbe all my sins
in thy orisonsbe all my sins remembered. i humbly thank you, well.no, not i. i never gave you aught. ha,
not i. i never gave you aught. ha, ha, are you honest? are you fair? that if you be honest
paradox, but nowthe time gives it proof. i did love you once. you should not have believed me, for virtuecannot
our old stock but we shallrelish of it. i loved you not. get thee to a nunnery. why wouldst thou
marry,marry a fool, for wise men know well enough whatmonsters you make of them. to a nunnery, go, andquickly too.
have heard of your paintings too, wellenough. god hath given you one face, and youmake yourselves another. you jig and
and youmake yourselves another. you jig and amble, andyou lisp; you nickname god's creatures and makeyour wantonness your ignorance. go
they are.to a nunnery, go. speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronouncedit to you, trippingly on the tongue;
i pronouncedit to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouthit, as many of our players do, i had
torrent, tempest, and, as i may say,whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire andbeget a temperance that may give it
have such a fellowwhipped for o'erdoing termagant. it out-herodsherod. pray you, avoid it. be not too tame neither, but let
theword, the word to the action, with this specialobservance, that you o'erstep not the modesty ofnature. for anything so o'erdone
most pitiful ambitionin the fool that uses it. go make you ready. bid the players make haste. will you two
they are coming to the play. i must be idle.get you a place. excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish.
i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. ieat the air, promise-crammed. you cannot feedcapons so. no, nor mine now. my lord,
nor mine now. my lord, youplayed once i' th' university, you say? what did you enact? it was a brute
your lap? i mean, my head upon your lap? do you think i meant country matters? that's a fair thought
jig-maker. what should aman do but be merry? for look you how cheerfullymy mother looks, and my father died within
keep counsel; they'll tell all. ay, or any show that you will show him. benot you ashamed to show, he'll
wormwood! if she should break it now! madam, how like you this play? o, but she'll keep her word. no,
galled jade wince;our withers are unwrung. i could interpret between you and your love,if i could see the puppets dallying.
love,if i could see the puppets dallying. it would cost you a groaning to take off mineedge. so you mis-take
gonzago. the story is extant and written invery choice italian. you shall see anon how themurderer gets the love of
perhaps plunge him into morecholer. i am tame, sir. pronounce. you are welcome. sir, i cannot. make you a wholesome
such answer as i can make, youshall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.therefore no more but to the matter.
impart. we shall obey, were she ten times our mother.have you any further trade with us? and do still, by
is something musty. i do not well understand that. will you playupon this pipe? i pray you. i do beseech
you playupon this pipe? i pray you. i do beseech you. it is as easy as lying. govern these ventageswith
breath withyour mouth, and it will discourse most eloquentmusic. look you, these are the stops. why, look you now, how
look you now, how unworthy a thingyou make of me! you would play upon me, youwould seem to know my
would play upon me, youwould seem to know my stops, you would pluckout the heart of my mystery, you would
is much music, excellent voice, in thislittle organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'sblood,do you think i am easier
to be played on than a pipe?call me what instrument you will, though you canfret me, you cannot play upon
though you canfret me, you cannot play upon me. do you see yonder cloud that's almost inshape of a camel?
sickly days., mother, mother, mother! now, mother, what's the matter?mother, you have my father much offended.go, go, you question with
queen, your husband's brother's wife,and (would it were not so) you are my mother.come, come, and sit you down; you
down; you shall not budge.you go not till i set you up a glasswhere you may see the inmost part
the world assurance of a man.this was your husband. look you now what follows.here is your husband, like a mildewed
your husband, like a mildewed earblasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes?could you on this fair mountain leave to feedand
mountain leave to feedand batten on this moor? ha! have you eyes?you cannot call it love, for at your agethe
and what judgmentwould step from this to this? sense sure you have,else could you not have motion; but sure that
such a difference. what devil was 'tthat thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,ears without hands
it in his pocket-- a king of shreds and patches--do you not come your tardy son to chide,that, lapsed in
acting of your dread command?o, say! how is it with you, lady?on him, on him! look you how pale he
them capable. do notlook upon me,lest with this piteous action you convertmy stern effects. then what i have to dowill
have to dowill want true color--tears perchance for blood. do you see nothing there? nor did you nothing hear?why, look
you see nothing there? nor did you nothing hear?why, look you there, look how it steals away!my father, in his
but go not to my uncle's bed.assume a virtue if you have it not.that monster, custom, who all sense doth
throw him outwith wondrous potency. once more, good night,and, when you are desirous to be blest,i'll blessing beg of you.
more, good lady.not this by no means that i bid you do:let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,pinch
tempt you again to bed,pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,and let him, for a pair of reechy
reechy kissesor paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,make you to ravel all this matter outthat i essentially am
essentially am not in madness,but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know,for who that's but a queen, fair,
basket creepand break your own neck down.i must to england, you know that.there's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,whom i
