HIERONIMO: Oh eyes, no eyes, but fountains fraught with tears;
Oh life, no life, but lively form of death;
Oh world, no world, but mass of public wrongs,
Confused and filled with murder and misdeeds.
Oh sacred heavens, if this unhallowed deed,
If this inhuman and barbarous attempt,
If this incomparable murder thus
Of mine, but now no more my son,
Shall unrevealed and unrevenged pass,
How should we term your dealings to be just, ... 
If you unjustly deal with those, that in your justice trust?
The night, sad secretary to my moans,
With direful visions wakes my vexed soul,
And with the wounds of my distressful son
Solicits me for notice of his death.
The ugly fiends do sally forth of hell,
And frame my steps to unfrequented paths,
And fear my heart with fierce inflamed thoughts.
The cloudy day my discontents records,
Early begins to register my dreams, ... 
And drive me forth to seek the murtherer.
Eyes, life, world, heavens, hell, night and day,
See, search, show, send some man, some mean, that may --
What's here? a letter? tush, it is not so:
A letter written to Hieronimo. 
For want of ink, receive this bloody writ:
Me hath my hapless brother hid from thee;
Revenge thyself on Balthazar and him:
For these were they that murdered thy son.
Hieronimo, revenge Horatio's death, ... 
And better fare than Bel-imperia doth.
What means this unexpected miracle?
My son slain by Lorenzo and the Prince.
What cause had they Horatio to malign?
Or what might move thee, Bel-imperia,
To accuse thy brother, had he been the mean?
Hieronimo, beware, thou art betrayed,
And to entrap thy life, this train is laid.
Advise thee therefore, be not credulous:
This is devised to endanger thee, ... 
That thou by this Lorenzo shouldst accuse;
And he, for thy dishonor done, should draw
Thy life in question and thy name in hate.
Dear was the life of my beloved son,
And of his death behoves me be revenged:
Then hazard not thine own, Hieronimo,
But live t'effect thy resolution.
I therefore will by circumstances try,
What I can gather, to confirm this writ;
And hearkening near the Duke of Castile's house, ... 
Close, if I can, with Bel-imperia,
To listen more but nothing to bewray. 
Now, Pedringano.

HIERONIMO: Where's thy Lady?

HIERONIMO:  My Lord --

HIERONIMO: Nay, nay, my Lord, I thank you, it shall not need;
I had a suit unto her, but too late,
And her disgrace makes me unfortunate.

HIERONIMO: Oh no, my Lord; I dare not; it must not be:
I humbly thank your Lordship.

HIERONIMO: Who? you, my Lord?
I reserve your favor for a greater honor;
This is a very toy, my Lord, a toy.

HIERONIMO: Y' faith, my Lord, tis an idle thing I must confess,
I ha' been too slack, too tardy, too remiss unto your honor.

HIERONIMO: In troth, my Lord, it is a thing of nothing:
The murder of a Son, or so --
A thing of nothing, my Lord.

HIERONIMO: My grief no heart, my thoughts no tongue can tell. 

HIERONIMO: Thus must we toil in other men's extremes,
That know not how to remedy our own;
And do them justice, when unjustly we,
For all our wrongs, can compass no redress.
But shall I never live to see the day,
That I may come (by justice of the heavens)
To know the cause that may my cares allay?
This toils my body, this consumeth age,
That only I to all men just must be,
And neither gods nor men be just to me. ... 

HIERONIMO: So is't my duty to regard his death,
Who, when he lived, deserved my dearest blood.
But come for that we came for: let's begin;
For here lies that which bids me to be gone.

HIERONIMO: Stand forth, thou monster, murderer of men;
And here, for satisfaction of the world,
Confess thy folly and repent thy fault;
For there's thy place of execution.

HIERONIMO: Peace, impudent, for thou shalt find it so;
For blood with blood shall, while I sit as judge,
Be satisfied, and the law discharged.
And though myself cannot receive the like,
Yet will I see that others have their right.
Dispatch: the fault's approved and confessed,
And by our law he is condemned to die. ... 

HIERONIMO: I have not seen a wretch so impudent.
Oh monstrous times, where murder's set so light, ... 
And where the soul, that should be shrined in heaven,
Solely delights in interdicted things,
Still wand'ring in the thorny passages,
That intercepts itself of happiness.
Murder, oh bloody monster! God forbid
A fault so foul should 'scape unpunished.
Dispatch, and see this execution done.
This makes me to remember thee, my son. 

HIERONIMO: Where shall I run to breathe abroad my woes,
My woes, whose weight hath wearied the earth?
Or mine exclaims, that have surcharged the air
With ceaseless plaints for my deceased son?
The blust'ring winds, conspiring with my words,
At my lament have moved the leafless trees,
Disrobed the meadows of their flowered green,
Made mountains marsh with spring-tides of my tears
And broken through the brazen gates of hell.
Yet still tormented is my tortured soul ... 
With broken sighs and restless passions
That winged mount; and, hovering in the air,
Beat at the windows of the brightest heavens,
Soliciting for justice and revenge:
But they are placed in those imperial heights,
Where, countermured with walls of diamond,
I find the place impregnable; and they
Resist my woes and give my words no way.

HIERONIMO: Well, what of him?

HIERONIMO: I warrant thee, give it me.

HIERONIMO: Aye, aye.

HIERONIMO: And yet, though somewhat nearer me concerns,
I will, to ease the grief that I sustain, ... 
Take truce with sorrow while I read on this.
'My Lord, I write as mine extremes required,
That you would labor my delivery;
If you neglect, my life is desperate,
And in my death I shall reveal the troth.
You know, my Lord, I slew him for your sake,
And was confederate with the Prince and you;
Won by rewards and hopeful promises,
I help to murder Don Horatio too.'
Help he to murder mine Horatio? ... 
And actors in th' accursed Tragedy
Wast thou, Lorenzo, Balthazar and thou,
Of whom my son, my son deserved so well?
What have I heard, what have mine eyes beheld?
Oh sacred heavens, may it come to pass
That such a monstrous and detested deed,
So closely smothered, and so long concealed,
Shall thus by this be venged or revealed?
Now see I what I durst not then suspect,
That Bel-imperia's Letter was not feigned. ... 
Nor feigned she, though falsely they have wronged
Both her, myself, Horatio, and themselves.
Now may I make compare 'twixt hers and this,
Of every accident I ne'er could find
Til now, and now I feelingly perceive
They did what heaven unpunished would not leave.
Oh false Lorenzo: are these thy flattering looks?
Is this the honor that thou didst my son?
And Balthazar, bane to my soul and me:
Was this the ransom he reserved thee for? ... 
Woe to the cause of these constrained wars;
Woe to thy baseness and captivity;
Woe to thy birth, thy body, and thy soul,
Thy cursed father, and thy conquered self;
And banned with bitter execrations be
The day and place where he did pity thee.
But wherefore waste I mine unfruitful words,
When naught but blood will satisfy my woes?
I will go plain me to my Lord the King,
And cry aloud for justice through the Court, ... 
Wearing the flints with these my withered feet;
And either purchase justice by entreats,
Or tire them all with my revenging threats. 

HIERONIMO: Tis neither as you think, nor as you think,
Nor as you think; you're wide all:
These slippers are not mine, they were my son Horatio's.
My son -- and what's a son? A thing begot
Within a pair of minutes, thereabout:
A lump bred up in darkness, and doth serve
To ballace these light creatures we call women;
And at nine months' end, creeps forth to light.
What is there yet in a son,
To make a father dote, rave, or run mad? ... 
Being born, it pouts, cries, and breeds teeth.
What is there yet in a son? He must be fed,
Be taught to go, and speak. Aye, or yet?
Why might not a man love a calf as well?
Or melt in passion o'er a frisking kid,
As for a son? Methinks, a young bacon,
Or a fine little smooth horse-colt,
Should move a man as much as doth a son.
For one of these, in very little time,
Will grow to some good use; whereas a son, ... 
The more he grows in stature and in years,
The more unsquared, unbeveled, he appears,
Reckons his parents among the rank of fools,
Strikes care upon their heads with his mad riots,
Makes them look old before they meet with age.
This is a son --
And what a loss were this, considered truly? --
Oh, but my Horatio
Grew out of reach of these insatiate humors:
He loved his loving parents; ... 
He was my comfort, and his mother's joy,
The very arm that did hold up our house:
Our hopes were stored up in him,
None but a damned murderer could hate him.
He had not seen the back of nineteen year,
When his strong arm unhorsed the proud Prince Balthazar,
And his great mind, too full of Honor,
Took him unto mercy:
That valiant, but ignoble Portingale.
Well, heaven is heaven still. ... 
And there is Nemesis, and Furies,
And things called whips,
And they sometimes do meet with murderers:
They do not always 'scape, that is some comfort,
Aye, aye, aye; and then time steals on,
And steals, and steals,
Til violence leaps forth like thunder
Wrapped in a ball of fire,
And so doth bring confusion to them all.

HIERONIMO: The next way from me.

HIERONIMO: Oh, hard by: tis yon house that you see.

HIERONIMO: Who, my Lord Lorenzo?

HIERONIMO:  Oh, forbear,
For other talk for us far fitter were.
But if you be importunate to know ... 
The way to him and where to find him out,
Then list to me, and I'll resolve your doubt.
There is a path upon your left-hand side
That leadeth from a guilty conscience
Unto a forest of distrust and fear,
A darksome place, and dangerous to pass:
There shall you meet with melancholy thoughts,
Whose baleful humors if you but uphold,
It will conduct you to despair and death:
Whose rocky cliffs when you have once beheld, ... 
Within a hugy dale of lasting night,
That, kindled with the world's iniquities,
Doth cast up filthy and detested fumes: --
Not far from thence, where murderers have built
A habitation for their cursed souls,
There, in a brazen cauldron, fixed by Jove,
In his fell wrath, upon a sulfur flame,
Yourselves shall find Lorenzo bathing him
In boiling lead and blood of innocents.

HIERONIMO:  Ha, ha, ha! ... 
Why, ha, ha, ha! Farewell, good ha, ha, ha. 

HIERONIMO: Now, sir, perhaps I come and see the King;
The King sees me, and fain would hear my suit;
Why, is not this a strange and seld-seen thing,
That standers-by with toys should strike me mute?
Go to, I see their shifts and say no more.
Hieronimo, tis time for thee to trudge:
Down by the dale that flows with purple gore,
Standeth a fiery Tower; there sits a judge
Upon a seat of steel and molten brass,
And 'twixt his teeth he holds a fire-brand ... 
That leads unto the lake where hell doth stand.
Away, Hieronimo! To him be gone:
He'll do thee justice for Horatio's death.
Turn down this path: thou shalt be with him straight;
Or this, and then thou needst not take thy breath:
This way, or that way -- soft and fair, not so:
For if I hang or kill myself, let's know
Who will revenge Horatio's murder then?
No, no; fie, no: pardon me, I'll none of that.
This way I'll take, and this way comes the King, ... 
And here I'll have a fling at him, that's flat.
And Balthazar, I'll be with thee to bring,
And thee, Lorenzo. Here's the King -- nay, stay,
And here, aye here -- there goes the hare away.

HIERONIMO: Justice, oh, justice to Hieronimo.

HIERONIMO: Oh, is he so?

HIERONIMO: Not I. Hieronimo beware; goe by, goe by.

HIERONIMO: Horatio, who calls Horatio? ... 

HIERONIMO: Justice, Oh, justice, justice, gentle King.

HIERONIMO: Justice! Oh justice: Oh my son, my son,
My son, whom naught can ransom or redeem.

HIERONIMO: Away, Lorenzo, hinder me no more.
For thou hast made me bankrupt of my bliss.
Give me my son; you shall not ransom him. ... 
Away, I'll rip the bowels of the earth, 
And ferry over to th' Elysian plains,
And bring my son to show his deadly wounds.
Stand from about me;
I'll make a pickaxe of my poniard,
And here surrender up my marshalship;
For I'll go marshal up the fiends in hell,
To be avenged on you all for this.

HIERONIMO: Nay, soft and fair; you shall not need to strive;
Needs must he go that the devils drive. 

HIERONIMO: I pry through every crevice of each wall,
Look on each tree and search through every brake,
Beat at the bushes, stamp our grandam earth,
Dive in the water and stare up to heaven: ... 
Yet cannot I behold my son Horatio. --
How now, who's there? Spirits, spirits?

HIERONIMO: What make you with your torches in the dark?

HIERONIMO: No, no, you are deceived -- not I -- you are deceived.
Was I so mad to bid you light your torches now?
Light me your torches at the mid of noon,
Whenas the sun-god rides in all his glory:
Light me your torches then.

HIERONIMO: Let it be burnt; night is a murderous slut
That would not have her treasons to be seen;
And yonder pale-faced Hecate there, the Moon,
Doth give consent to that is done in darkness;
And all those Stars that gaze upon her face
Are aeglets on her sleeve, pins on her train;
And those that should be powerful and divine
Do sleep in darkness, when they most should shine.

HIERONIMO: Villain, thou liest, and thou dost nought
But tell me I am mad: Thou liest, I am not mad!
I know thee to be Pedro, and he Jaques.
I'll prove it to thee; and were I mad, how could I?
Where was she that same night when my Horatio
Was murdered? She should have shone: Search thou the book.
Had the moon shone in my boy's face there was a kind of grace,
That I know -- nay, I do know -- had the murderer seen him,
His weapon would have fall'n and cut the earth, ... 
Had he been framed of naught but blood and death.
Alack, when mischief doth it knows not what,
What shall we say to mischief? 

HIERONIMO: Indeed, Isabella, we do nothing here;
I do not cry: ask Pedro, and ask Jaques;
Not I, indeed; we are very merry, very merry.
ISABELLA: How? Be merry here, be merry here?
Is not this the place, and this the very tree, ... 
Where my Horatio died, where he was murdered?

HIERONIMO: Was -- do not say what: let her weep it out.
This was the tree; I set it of a kernel:
And when our hot Spain could not let it grow,
But that the infant and the human sap
Began to wither, duly twice a morning
Would I be sprinkling it with fountain-water.
At last it grew, and grew, and bore, and bore,
Til at length
It grew a gallows, and did bear our sonne, ... 
It bore thy fruit and mine: oh wicked, wicked plant.
See who knocks there.

HIERONIMO: Bid him come in, and paint some comfort,
For surely there's none lives but painted comfort.
Let him come in. One knows not what may chance:
Gods will that I should set this tree -- but even so
Masters' ungrateful servants rear from nought,
And then they hate them that did bring them up. 

HIERONIMO:  Wherefore, why, thou scornful villain?
How, where, or by what means should I be blest? ... 

HIERONIMO: Oh ambitious beggar, wouldst thou have that
That lives not in the world?
Why, all the undelved mines cannot buy
An ounce of justice; tis a jewel so inestimable.
I tell thee, God hath engrossed all justice in his hands,
And there is none but what comes from him.

HIERONIMO: How, was thy son murdered?

HIERONIMO: What, not as thine? That's a lie
As massy as the earth: I had a son
Whose least unvalued hair did weigh
A thousand of thy son's: and he was murdered.

HIERONIMO: Nor I, nor I: but this same one of mine
Was worth a legion. But all is one.
Pedro, Jaques, go in a-doors; Isabella, go,
And this good fellow here and I
Will range this hideous orchard up and down, ... 
Like to two Lions reaved of their young.
Go in a-doors, I say. 
Come, let's talk wisely now. Was thy son murdered?

HIERONIMO:  So was mine.
How dost take it? Art thou not sometimes mad?
Is there no tricks that comes before thine eyes?

HIERONIMO: Art a Painter? canst paint me a tear, or a wound,
a groan or a sigh? Canst paint me such a tree as this?

HIERONIMO: Bazardo, afore-god, an excellent fellow. Look you,
sir, do you see, I'd have you paint me  my Gallery, in your oil
colors matted, and draw me five years younger than I am --
do ye see, sir, let five years go, let them go like the Marshal of
Spain -- my wife Isabella standing by me, with a speaking look to
my son Horatio, which should intend to this or some such-like
purpose: 'God bless thee, my sweet son,' and my hand leaning
upon his head, thus, sir. Do you see? may it be done?

HIERONIMO: Nay, I pray, mark me, sir: then, sir, would I have you
paint me this tree, this very tree. Canst paint a doleful cry?

HIERONIMO: Nay, it should cry; but all is one. Well, sir, paint me
a youth run through and through with villain's swords, hanging
upon this tree. Canst thou draw a murderer?

HIERONIMO: Oh, let them be worse, worse: stretch thine
Art, and let their beards be of Judas his own color; and let ... 
their eyebrows jutty over: in any case observe that. Then,
sir, after some violent noise, bring me forth in my shirt,
and my gown under mine arm, with my torch in my hand
and my sword reared up thus: and with these words:
'What noise is this? Who calls Hieronimo?'
May it be done?

HIERONIMO: Well, sir; then bring me forth, bring me through alley
and alley, still with a distracted countenance going along, and let
my hair heave up my night-cap. Let the Clouds scowl, make
the Moon dark, the Stars extinct, the Winds blowing, the Bells
tolling, the Owl shrieking, the Toads croaking, the minutes ... 
jarring, and the clock striking twelve. And than at last, sir,
starting, behold a man hanging, and tottering, and tottering, as
you know the wind will wave a man, and I with a trice to cut
him down. And looking upon him by the advantage of my torch,
find it to be my son Horatio. There you may  a passion,
there you may show a passion. Draw me like old Priam of Troy,
crying: 'the house is a-fire, the house is a-fire, as the torch over
my head!' Make me curse, make me rave, make me cry, make
me mad, make me well again, make me curse hell, invocate
heaven, and in the end leave me in a trance -- and so forth.

HIERONIMO: Oh no, there is no end: the end is death and madness.
As I am never better than when I am mad; then methinks I am
a brave fellow; then I do wonders: but reason abuseth me,
and there's the torment, there's the hell. At the last, sir, bring
me to one of the murderers; were he as strong as Hector,
thus would I tear and drag him up and drown.

HIERONIMO: Vindicta mihi!
Aye, heaven will be revenged of every ill;
Nor will they suffer murder unrepaid.
Then stay, Hieronimo, attend their will:
For mortal men may not appoint their time.
Per scelus semper tutum est sceleribus iter.
Strike, and strike home, where wrong is offered thee;
For evils unto ills conductors be,
And death's the worst of resolution.
For he that thinks with patience to contend ... 
To quiet life, his life shall easily end. --
Fata si miseros juvant, habes salutem;
Fata si vitam negant, habes sepulchrum:
If destiny thy miseries do ease,
Then hast thou health, and happy shalt thou be:
If destiny deny thee life, Hieronimo,
Yet shalt thou be assured of a tomb:
If neither, yet let this thy comfort be,
Heaven covereth him that hath no burial.
And to conclude, I will revenge his death, ... 
But how? not as the vulgar wits of men,
With open, but inevitable ills,
As by a secret, yet a certain mean,
Which under kind-ship will be cloaked best.
Wise men will take their opportunity,
Closely and safely fitting things to time.
But in extremes advantage hath no time.
And therefore all times fit not for revenge
Thus therefore will I rest me in unrest,
Dissembling quiet in unquietness, ... 
Not seeming that I know their villainies,
That my simplicity may make them think
That ignorantly I will let all slip:
For ignorance, I wot, and well they know,
Remedium malorum iners est.
Nor ought avails it me to menace them
Who, as a wintry storm upon a plain,
Will bear me down with their nobility.
No, no, Hieronimo, thou must enjoin
Thine eyes to observation, and thy tongue ... 
To milder speeches than thy spirit affords;
Thy heart to patience and thy hands to rest,
Thy Cap to courtesy, and thy knee to bow,
Til to revenge thou know when, where, and how. 
How now, what noise? What coil is that you keep? 

HIERONIMO: That I should plead their several actions?
Why, let them enter, and let me see them. ... 

HIERONIMO: Come near, you men, that thus importune me. --
 Now must I bear a face of gravity,
For thus I used, before my Marshalship,
To plead in causes as Corregidor. --
Come on, sirs, what's the matter?

HIERONIMO: Of Battery?

HIERONIMO:  Give place. ... 

HIERONIMO: Content you, sirs; are you determined
That I should plead your several actions?

HIERONIMO: But wherefore stands yon silly man so mute,
With mournful eyes and hands to heaven upreared?
Come hither, father, let me know thy cause.

HIERONIMO: Say, father, tell me what's thy suit?

HIERONIMO: What's here? 'The humble supplication
Of Don Bazulto for his murdered son.'

HIERONIMO:  No, sir, it was my murdered son, ... 
Oh my son, my son, Oh my son Horatio.
But mine, or thine, Bazulto, be content.
Here, take my handercher, and wipe thine eyes,
Whiles wretched I in thy mishaps may see
The lively portrait of my dying self.
Oh no, not this; Horatio, this was thine;
And when I dyed it in thy dearest blood,
This was a token twixt thy soul and me,
That of thy death revenged I should be.
But here, take this, and this -- what, my purse? -- ... 
Aye this, and that, and all of them are thine;
For all as one are our extremities.

HIERONIMO: See, see, oh see thy shame, Hieronimo;
See here a loving father to his son:
Behold the sorrows and the sad laments
That he delivereth for his son's decease.
If love's effects so strives in lesser things,
If love enforce such moods in meaner wits, ... 
If love express such power in poor estates;
Hieronimo, when, as a raging Sea,
Tossed with the wind and tide, o'erturnest then
The upper billows' course of waves to keep,
Whilest lesser waters labor in the deep:
Then shamest thou not, Hieronimo, to neglect
The sweet revenge of thy Horatio?
Though on this earth justice will not be found,
I'll down to hell, and in this passion
Knock at the dismal gates of Pluto's court, ... 
Getting by force, as once Alcides did,
A troop of furies and tormenting hags,
To torture Don Lorenzo and the rest.
Yet lest the triple-headed porter should
Deny my passage to the slimy strand,
The Thracian poet thou shalt counterfeit.
Come on, old father, be my Orpheus,
And if thou canst no notes upon the Harp,
Then sound the burden of thy sore heart's grief,
Til we do gain that Proserpine may grant
Revenge on them that murdered my son. ... 
Then will I rent and tear them, thus, and thus,
Shivering their limbs in pieces with my teeth. 

HIERONIMO: That cannot be, I gave it never a wound;
Show me one drop of blood fall from the same:
How is it possible I should slay it then? ... 
Tush, no; run after, catch me if you can.

enters again, who, staring him the face, speaks.

HIERONIMO: And art thou come, Horatio, from the depth,
To ask for justice in this upper earth,
To tell thy father thou art unrevenged,
To wring more tears from Isabella's eyes,
Whose lights are dimmed with over-long laments?
Go back, my son, complain to Aecus;
For here's no justice; gentle boy, be gone,
For justice is exiled from the earth:
Hieronimo will bear thee company. ... 
Thy mother cries on righteous Rhadamanth
For just revenge against the murderers.

HIERONIMO: But let me look on my Horatio.
Sweet boy, how art thou changed in death's black shade.
Had Proserpine no pity on thy youth,
But suffered thy fair crimson-colored spring
With withered winter to be blasted thus?
Horatio, thou art older than thy father:
Ah, ruthless fate, that favor thus transforms. ... 

HIERONIMO: What, not my son? thou then a fury art,
Sent from the empty Kingdom of black night,
To summon me to make appearance
Before grim Minos and just Rhadamanth,
To plague Hieronimo, that is remiss,
And seeks not vengeance for Horatio's death.

HIERONIMO: Aye, now I know thee, now thou namest thy son; ... 
Thou art the lively image of my grief;
Within thy face, my sorrows I may see.
Thy eyes are gummed with tears, thy cheeks are wan,
Thy forehead troubled, and thy mutt'ring lips
Murmur sad words abruptly broken off
By force of windy sighs thy spirit breathes;
And all this sorrow riseth for thy son;
And self-same sorrow feel I for my son.
Come in, old man, thou shalt to Isabel;
Lean on my arm; I thee, thou me, shalt stay, ... 
And thou, and I and she will sing a song,
Three parts in one, but all of discords framed: --
Talk not of cords, but let us now be gone,
For with a cord Horatio was slain. 

HIERONIMO: And where's the Duke?

HIERONIMO:  Even so. --
What new device have they devised, trow?
Pocas Palabras, mild as the Lamb:
Is't I will be revenged? no, I am not the man.

HIERONIMO: My Lords, I thank you for Horatio.

HIERONIMO:  What, so short?
Then I'll be gone, I thank you for't.

HIERONIMO: With me, sir? why my Lord, I thought you had done.

HIERONIMO: Why, is not this a miserable thing, my Lord?

HIERONIMO: Your son Lorenzo? whom, my noble Lord?
The hope of Spain, mine honorable friend? ... 
Grant me the combat of them if they dare:
I'll meet him face-to-face, to tell me so.
These be the scandalous reports of such
As love not me, and hate my Lord too much.
Should I suspect Lorenzo would prevent
Or cross my suit, that loved my son so well?
My Lord, I am ashamed it should be said.

HIERONIMO: My good Lord, I know you did not.

HIERONIMO: Aye, marry, my Lord, and shall.
Friends, quoth he? see, I'll be friends with you all:
Specially with you, my lovely Lord;
For divers causes it is fit for us
That we be friends: the world is suspicious, ... 
And men may think what we imagine not.

HIERONIMO: What else? it were a shame it should not be so.

HIERONIMO: Your Lordship's to command. Pah: keep your way:
Chi mi fa piu carezze che non suole,
Tradito mi ha, o tradir mi voule. 