HIERONIMO: But may it be that Bel-imperia ... 
Vows such revenge as she hath deigned to say?
Why then I see that heaven applies our drift,
And all the Saints do sit soliciting
For vengeance on those cursed murderers.
Madam, tis true, and now I find it so,
I found a letter, written in your name,
And in that Letter, how Horatio died.
Pardon, O pardon, Bel-imperia,
My fear and care in not believing it;
Nor think I thoughtless think upon a mean ... 
To let his death be unrevenged at full:
And here I vow -- so you but give consent,
And will conceal my resolution --
I will erelong determine of their deaths
That causeless thus have murdered my son.

HIERONIMO: On then; whatsoever I devise,
Let me entreat you, grace my practices: ... 
For why the plot's already in mine head.
Here they are. 

HIERONIMO: Aye, my Lord; such courting as, I promise you,
She hath my heart, but you, my Lord, have hers.

HIERONIMO:  My help?
Why, my good Lords, assure yourselves of me;
For you have given me cause; aye, by my faith, have you.

HIERONIMO: Is this all?

HIERONIMO: Why then, I'll fit you; say no more.
When I was young, I gave my mind ... 
And plied myself to fruitless Poetry;
Which though it profit the professor naught,
Yet is it passing pleasing to the world.

HIERONIMO:  Marry, my good Lord, thus:
(And yet, methinks, you are too quick with us): --
When in Toledo there I studied,
It was my chance to write a Tragedy,
See here, my Lords -- 
Which, long forgot, I found this other day.
Now would your Lordships favor me so much ... 
As but to grace me with your acting it --
I mean each one of you to play a part --
Assure you it will prove most passing strange,
And wondrous plausible to that assembly.

HIERONIMO: Why, Nero thought it no disparagement,
And Kings and Emperors have ta'en delight
To make experience of their wits in plays.

HIERONIMO: Now, my good Lord, could you entreat
Your sister Bel-imperia to make one?
For what's a play without a woman in it?

HIERONIMO: Why this is well: I tell you, Lordings,
It was determined to have been acted ... 
By Gentlemen and scholars too,
Such as could tell what to speak.

HIERONIMO: That shall I roundly. The Chronicles of Spain
Record this written of a Knight of Rhodes:
He was betrothed, and wedded at the length,
To one Perseda, an Italian Dame, ... 
Whose beauty ravished all that her beheld,
Especially the soul of Soliman,
Who at the marriage was the chiefest guest.
By sundry means sought Soliman to win
Perseda's love, and could not gain the same.
Then 'gan he break his passions to a friend,
One of his Bashaws whom he held full dear;
Her had this Bashaw long solicited,
And saw she was not otherwise to be won,
But by her husband's death, this Knight of Rhodes, ... 
Whom presently by treachery he slew.
She, stirred with an exceeding hate therefore,
As cause of this, slew Soliman,
And, to escape the Bashaw's tyranny,
Did stab herself, and this the Tragedy.

HIERONIMO: Marry, thus:
Moved with remorse of his misdeeds,
Ran to a mountain-top, and hung himself. ... 

HIERONIMO: Oh, that will I, my Lords, make no doubt of it:
I'll play the murderer, I warrant you;
For I have already conceited that.

HIERONIMO: Great Soliman, the Turkish Emperor.

HIERONIMO:  Erastus, the Knight of Rhodes.

HIERONIMO: Perseda, chaste and resolute. --
And here, my Lords, are several abstracts drawn, ... 
For each of you to note your parts,
And act it, as occasion's offered you.
You must provide a Turkish cap,
A black mustachio, and a Falchion; 
You, with a Cross, like to a Knight of Rhodes;
And Madam, you must attire yourself,
Like Phoebe, Flora, or the huntress,
Which to your discretion shall seem best.
And as for me, my Lords, I'll look to one,
And with the ransom that the Viceroy sent, ... 
So furnish and perform this Tragedy,
As all the world shall say, Hieronimo
Was liberal in gracing of it so.

HIERONIMO: A Comedy?
Fie, Comedies are fit for common wits:
But to present a Kingly troop withal,
Give me a stately-written Tragedy;
Tragedia cothurnata, fitting Kings,
Containing matter, and not common things. ... 
My Lords, all this must be perfourmed,
As fitting for the first night's reveling.
The Italian Tragedians were so sharp of wit
That in one hour's meditation
They would perform anything in action.

HIERONIMO: In Paris? Mass, and well remembered.
There's one thing more that rests for us to do.

HIERONIMO: Each one of us must act his part
In unknown languages,
That it may breed the more variety:
As you, my Lord, in Latin, I in Greek,
You in Italian, and for because I know
That Bel-imperia hath practiced the French,
In courtly French shall all her phrases be.

HIERONIMO: It must be so; for the conclusion
Shall prove the intention, and all was good:
And I myself in an Oration,
And with a strange and wondrous show besides,
That I will have there behind a curtain,
Assure yourself, shall make the matter known:
And all shall be concluded in one Scene,
For there's no pleasure ta'en in tediousness.

HIERONIMO: You'll ply this gear?

HIERONIMO:  Why so:
Now shall I see the fall of Babylon,
Wrought by the heavens in this confusion.
And if the world like not this tragedy,
Hard is the hap of old Hieronimo. 

HIERONIMO: Oh sir, it is for the author's credit,
To look that all things may go well.
But, good my Lord, let me entreat your grace
To give the King the copy of the play:
This is the argument of what we show.

HIERONIMO: One thing more, my good Lord.

HIERONIMO:  Let me entreat your grace ... 
That, when the train are passed into the gallery,
You would vouchsafe to throw me down the key.

HIERONIMO: What, are you ready, Balthazar?
Bring a chair and a cushion for the King. 
Well done, Balthazar, Hang up the Title:
Our scene is Rhodes: -- what, is your beard on?

HIERONIMO: Dispatch, for shame; are you so long? ... 
Bethink thyself, Hieronimo,
Recall thy wits, recompt thy former wrongs
Thou hast received by murder of thy son.
And lastly, not the least, how Isabel,
Once his mother and thy dearest wife,
All woe-begone for him, hath slain herself.
Behooves thee then, Hieronimo, to be revenged.
The plot is laid of dire revenge:
On, then, Hieronimo, pursue revenge,
For nothing wants but acting of revenge. 

HIERONIMO: 'Whatever joy earth yields, betide your Majesty.'

HIERONIMO: 'Let then Perseda on your grace attend.'

HIERONIMO: 'Remove Erasto, mighty Soliman,
And then Perseda will be quickly won.'

HIERONIMO: 'Let not Erasto live to grieve great Soliman.'

HIERONIMO: 'But if he be your rival, let him die.'

HIERONIMO: 'Erasto, Soliman saluteth thee, ... 
And lets thee wit by me his highness' will,
Which is, thou shouldest be thus employed.' 

HIERONIMO: But Bel-imperia plays Perseda well.

HIERONIMO: Marry, this follows for Hieronimo:
Here break we off our sundry languages,
And thus conclude I in our vulgar tongue.
Happily you think -- but bootless are your thoughts --
That this is fabulously counterfeit,
And that we do as all Tragedians do:
To die today for fashioning our Scene --
The death of Ajax or some Roman peer -- ... 
And in a minute starting up again,
Revive to please tomorrow's audience.
No, Princes; know I am Hieronimo,
The hopeless father of a hapless Son,
Whose tongue is tuned to tell his latest tale,
Not to excuse gross errors in the play.
I see your looks urge instance of these words;
Behold the reason urging me to this: 
See here my show, look on this spectacle:
Here lay my hope, and here my hope hath end: ... 
Here lay my heart, and here my heart was slain:
Here lay my treasure, here my treasure lost:
Here lay my bliss, and here my bliss bereft:
But hope, heart, treasure, joy and bliss,
All fled, failed, died, yea, all decayed with this.
From forth these wounds came breath that gave me life;
They murdered me that made these fatal marks.
The cause was love, whence grew this mortal hate;
The hate: Lorenzo and young Balthazar:
The love: my son to Bel-imperia. ... 
But night, the coverer of accursed crimes,
With pitchy silence hushed these traitors' harms,
And lent them leave, for they had sorted leisure
To take advantage in my Garden-plot
Upon my Son, my dear Horatio:
There merciless they butchered up my boy,
In black dark night, to pale dim, cruel death.
He shrieks: I heard, and yet, methinks, I hear
His dismal out-cry echo in the air.
With soonest speed I hasted to the noise, ... 
Where hanging on a tree I found my son,
Through-girt with wounds, and slaughtered as you see.
And grieved I (think you) at this spectacle?
Speak, Portuguese, whose loss resembles mine:
If thou canst weep upon thy Balthazar,
Tis like I wailed for my Horatio.
And you, my L, whose reconciled son
Marched in a net, and thought himself unseen,
And rated me for brain-sick lunacy,
With 'God amend that mad Hieronimo,' ... 
How can you brook our play's Catastrophe?
And here behold this bloody handkercher,
Which at Horatio's death I weeping dipped
Within the river of his bleeding wounds.
It is propitious, see, I have reserved,
And never hath it left my bloody heart,
Soliciting remembrance of my vow
With these, Oh, these accursed murderers:
Which, now performed, my heart is satisfied.
And to this end the Bashaw I became,
That might revenge me on Lorenzo's life, ... 
Who therefore was appointed to the part,
And was to represent the Knight of Rhodes,
That I might kill him more conveniently.
So, Viceroy, was thus Balthazar, thy Son,
That Soliman which Bel-imperia,
In person of Perseda, murdered:
Solely appointed to that tragic part
That she might slay him that offended her.
Poor Bel-imperia missed her part in this, ... 
For though the story saith she should have died,
Yet I of kindness, and of care to her,
Did otherwise determine of her end;
But love of him, whom they did hate too much
Did urge her resolution to be such.
And, Princes, now behold Hieronimo,
Author and actor in this Tragedy,
Bearing his latest fortune in his fist;
And will as resolute conclude his part
As any of the Actors gone before. ... 
And, Gentles, thus I end my play;
Urge no more words, I have no more to say.

HIERONIMO: Viceroy, I will not trust thee with my life,
Which I this day have offered to my son. ... 
Accused wretch,
Why stayest thou him that was resolved to die?

HIERONIMO: Oh, good words: as dear to me was my Horatio,
As yours, or yours, or yours, my L, to you,
My guiltless Son was by Lorenzo slain, ... 
And by Lorenzo and that Balthazar
Am I at last revenged thoroughly,
Upon whose souls may heavens be yet avenged
With greater far than these afflictions.

HIERONIMO: What lesser liberty can kings afford
Than harmless silence? then afford it me. ... 
Sufficeth, I may not, nor I will not tell thee.

HIERONIMO: Indeed thou mayest torment me, as his wretched Son
Hath done in murd'ring my Horatio:
But never shall thou force me to reveal
The thing which I have vowed inviolate.
And therefore, in despite of all thy threats,
Pleased with their deaths, and eased with their revenge,
First take my tongue, and afterwards my heart. ... 

HIERONIMO: But are you sure they are dead?

HIERONIMO: What, and yours too?

HIERONIMO: Nay, then I care not; come, and we shall be friends;
Let us lay our heads together:
See, here's a goodly noose will hold them all.

HIERONIMO: Secure? why doest thou wonder at it? ... 
I tell thee, Viceroy, this day I have seen revenge,
And in that sight am grown a prouder monarch
Than ever sat under the Crown of Spain.
Had I as many lives as there be Stars,
As many heavens to go to, as those lives,
I'd give them all, aye, and my soul to boot,
But I would see thee ride in this red pool.

HIERONIMO: Oh, good words: as dear to me was my Horatio,
As yours, or yours, or yours, my L, to you,
My guiltless Son was by Lorenzo slain, ... 
And by Lorenzo and that Balthazar
Am I at last revenged thoroughly,
Upon whose souls may heavens be yet avenged
With greater far than these afflictions.

HIERONIMO: Methinks, since I grew inward with Revenge, ... 
I cannot look with scorn enough on Death.

HIERONIMO: Do, do, do; and meantime I'll torture you.
You had a Son (as I take it), and your Son
Should ha'e been married to your daughter: ha, wast not so?
You had a Son too, he was my Liege's Nephew;
He was proud and politic. Had he lived,
He might a come to wear the crown of Spain --
I thinke 'twas so: 'twas I that killed him; ... 
Look you, this same hand 'twas it that stabbed
His heart -- do ye see? this hand --
For one Horatio, if you ever knew him:
A youth, one that they hanged up in his father's garden,
One that did force your valiant Son to yield,
While your more valiant Son did take him prisoner.

HIERONIMO: Now do I applaud what I have acted. ... 
Nunc iners cadat manus.
Now to express the rupture of my part,
First take my tongue and afterwards my heart.